
Welcome (sign in | sign up)


Enter search keywords...

Advanced Search
Subscribe
Current Issue
NYR Daily
Calendar
Archive
Classifieds
Shop
Newsletters
New York Review of Books
EMAIL PRINT
Ain’t It Always Stephen Stills
Lorrie Moore AUGUST 17, 2017 ISSUE
Stephen Stills: Change Partners
by David Roberts
Red Planet, 326 pp., $26.95

VARA Broadcasting Association
Stephen Stills performing on the Dutch television program Toppop, 1972
Several years ago an academic colleague and I embarked on what we called a “Stills-off”: we would listen to our record collections and narrow the musician Stephen Stills’s oeuvre down to its top five songs. Then we’d see whose list was better. I assumed our choices would overlap, and that high among them would be “4 + 20,” whose piercing Appalachian melancholy seems to belong more to the ages than to the moody twenty-four-year-old who wrote it, as well as “Find the Cost of Freedom” with its sea shanty cry of grief and endurance. We would both surely include his Buffalo Springfield resistance anthem “For What It’s Worth,” with Stills’s calm, urgent baritone and rhythmic stops; originally released to protest a Los Angeles curfew—its composition probably began earlier when Stills was still nineteen—it has endured long past its original occasion. According to Tim Rice it is “one of the best songs ever written with just two chords.” (Rice is a lyricist: the song has more than two chords.)

But my colleague and I could not stay away from Stills’s rocking guitar solos—“Crossroads,” for instance, or “Ain’t It Always,” pieces that got Stills labeled “Guitar God” on YouTube. Then there is “The Love Gangster,” from his double album, Manassas, on which Bill Wyman of the Rolling Stones plays bass. Wyman wanted at the time to leave the Stones and join Stills’s band; the instruments on Manassas are all in the hands of virtuosos. Stills has put out recordings in which, like Prince, he has played all the instruments and sung all the parts. (“Do for the Others,” a song from his first solo album, is aptly named.) But Manassas did not require that.

And so our lists began to burst at the seams and soon the Stills-off seemed an increasingly stupid exercise. Stills, now seventy-two, has often been named one of the top rock guitarists of all time and is the only musician to have recorded with both Jimi Hendrix and Eric Clapton on the same album—his first solo LP (1970). His work has sprung from every stripe of American music—blues, folk, rock, “songs with roots,” as he has put it; he was “Americana” and “singer-songwriter” before those terms were used. And although as a child he began as a drummer and tap dancer, the only percussion one is likely to hear from him now might be when he knocks rhythmically against an acoustic guitar. Once, on a 2006 tour that was being filmed, he tripped over some electrical cords and fell to the stage with a certain percussive flair. “We’ve got more lights than we’re used to,” he said. “We usually don’t care if they can see us because we’re old.”

A year after my misbegotten Stills-off I attended a sold-out concert in Nashville by the Long Players, a tribute band that performs one single album from start to finish at each of its concerts. This time they had chosen Déjà Vu (witty!), which is the first and best (and for a long while was the only) album by Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young. (Ampersand and no Oxford comma for Young: when he needs to get out of a band he flees quickly.) No sooner had the Long Players begun with Stills’s “Carry On” than the capacity crowd was standing—this cannot always be counted on with members of the AARP—and singing along at the top of their lungs. Jubilant, revelatory, the evening was more than a geezer-pleaser: it was baby boomer church, late-middle-aged ecstasy, a generation stating that it had not just yet entirely surrendered to the next. I started to suspect that no American demographic had so thoroughly memorized an album—not even one by the Beatles or Bob Dylan or Joni Mitchell—as this generation of baby boomers had Déjà Vu.

The summer after that concert, on a porch in New England, I found myself among several dinner guests sitting about postprandially in the July night. Suddenly a guitar appeared, and just as suddenly we were all singing Stills’s “Helplessly Hoping.” Though we did not know one another that well, working from brain muscle memory we knew the song so automatically that harmony was possible. There was no Beatles or Dylan song we could have sung as successfully. I began to marvel, yet again, at how much, for a particular generation, the songs of Stephen Stills were marinated into our minds, our spines, our bones.

Now it was March 2017, and a friend and I were waiting for Stills to step onto the stage of Nashville’s legendary Ryman Auditorium with the Allmanesque Kenny Wayne Shepherd and an old hipster keyboardist, Barry Goldberg. The three of them have been playing together, in a blues-rock ensemble called the Rides, since 2013. (Stills once said that Crosby, Stills, and Nash called themselves by their names not just so they could be free to come and go but because “all the animals were taken.”) The Rides, which Stills has called “the blues band of my dreams,” got its name from Shepherd’s and Stills’s shared love of cars. (“We’re not Prius people,” Stills has said.) That he continues to play gigs at his age is evidence of his stubborn professionalism; from the time he was a teenager—from the early Au Go-Go Singers to Buffalo Springfield to Manassas—he was the one to organize his bands.

The Ryman audience was again primarily made up of the generation that came of age during the 1960s—a sea of snowy hair. Stills himself was twenty-two during the summer of love. Because of prodigies like him, whose careers were enabled by the radio—especially ones in cars—almost every kind of music remains emotionally available to an audience this age, except perhaps hip-hop (though Stills has even done some crossover with Spike Lee and Public Enemy for the film He Got Game).

Stills may be hobbled by arthritis—backstage he bumps fists rather than shakes hands with fans; he has carpal tunnel and residual pain from a long-ago broken hand, which affects his playing—and he is nearly deaf, but his performance life has continued. Drugs and alcohol may have dented him somewhat, forming a kind of carapace over the youthful sensitivity and cockiness one often saw in the face of the young Stills. Some might infer by looking at the spry James Taylor or Mick Jagger that heroin is less hard on the body than cocaine and booze, which perhaps tear down the infrastructure. (“Stills doesn’t know how to do drugs properly,” Keith Richards once said.) But one has to hand it to a rock veteran who still wants to get on stage and make music even when his youthful beauty and once-tender, husky baritone have dimmed. It shows allegiance to the craft, to the life, to the music. It risks a derisive sort of criticism as well as an assault on nostalgia.

The Rides’ Nashville concert comes on the heels of a “definitive biography” of Stills by the British author David Roberts. Titled Change Partners, after one of Stills’s own songs, the book is an act of hurried, sloppy, aggregated love. Ignore the typos—mistakes such as “sewed” for “sowed”; “daubed” for “dubbed”—and don’t go looking for any psychological depth. Roberts has collected most of his data from widely available interviews. A speedy checklist of girlfriends—Judy Collins, Rita Coolidge, Joan Baez, Susan Saint James—plus wives and children will largely have to do for an account of Stills’s personal life. The lovely “Rock and Roll Woman” is declared in passing to be a valentine to Grace Slick.

Roberts is far more interested in constructing a chronicle—flow charts would have been helpful—of the constantly shifting permutations and reunions that formed Stills’s music-making through the decades, and that early on gave us the sublime Crosby, Stills, and Nash (and sometimes Young), cobbled from the Byrds, the Hollies, and Buffalo Springfield. The “beautiful Celtic keen of Graham’s and David’s cat’s purr, and my cement mixer” was how Stills characterized band members’ voices. Stills needed Young’s guitar-playing to help ignite his own, and sometimes there was electric sparring between them onstage. They all performed like jazz musicians—conversational, improvised—and no two live versions of their songs are the same.

To those looking on, it seemed Nash had the organizational skills; Crosby had the intuition; Stills had the musical chops and the brilliant songwriting; Neil Young—like a comet zooming in and out of orbit—had the poetry and mystique and artistic searching but seldom joined the choirboy harmonies at which the other three excelled. “Neil wants to be Tony Orlando and we’re Dawn,” joked Stills in the 2008 documentary CSNY Déjà Vu. Young had planned the 2006 concert tour as a war protest and decorated the stage with yellow ribbons. Stills seemed afraid it was political kitsch but he went along.

Though born in Texas of midwestern parents, Stills was primarily a Florida boy, having spent his adolescence in Tampa and St. Petersburg, as well as Louisiana and Costa Rica. He speaks Spanish; his father was a building contractor whose peripatetic business often followed the military. Home life mirrored that of many postwar families (“What do we do, given life? We move around,” wrote Stills in a 1972 song). Stills went to five different high schools. Skilled at several instruments, he played in high school ensembles, including marching bands, and he has since donated money to the University of Florida marching band. He spent a brief period in a military academy and clearly believes such bands are where many musicians get their start.

Florida has always been an interesting hub of musical styles—a farrago of Appalachian, country, gospel, blues, Latino (Caribbean and Cuban émigré), and Seminole traditions. In jazz the great bass player Jaco Pastorius is often thought to be an embodiment of the region’s unique sound, guitar notes bending in a tropical otherworldly fusion. (Hip-hop too has its own South Florida subgenre.) In rock there was Jim Morrison, the Allman Brothers, and Lynyrd Skynyrd, who named themselves after their Jacksonville high school gym teacher. Ray Charles made his early reputation in Florida, as did Tom Petty.

Stills brought a distinctive combination of country, folk, Latin, blues, and rock to every band he was in. One can already hear these influences converging in “Suite: Judy Blue Eyes” (1969), a folk-rock love song written about Judy Collins, whose rousing coda has a strong Latin flavor, due to Stills’s overlaid vocal track. CSN performed it at Woodstock. Stills wrote songs of great variety of style and mood and composed quickly but unconventionally, often pulling together tracks he had recorded earlier in his studio before he knew where they might land—the equivalent of a writer’s notebook or a chef’s pantry. Stills liked to cook, both literally and figuratively, for his bands. “Carry On” was written in eight hours.

Again, one may circle back to wonder—skeptically, impertinently—what causes Stills to keep playing into his advanced years? One reason may simply be that he is bringing an entire generation along with him. Neil Young allegedly once played a new and unpopular album in its entirety before a British audience, to much grumbling from the ticket holders who wanted to hear something familiar. When he announced toward the close, “Now we’re going to play something you’ve heard before,” the crowd cheered in relief. And then Young played again the first song he had played that evening. Young has worked at some price, and eccentrically, not to become a human jukebox.

Of course, it is a paying job to tour, and Stills has incurred the expenses of a celebrity who grew up without much. Jimi Hendrix, when asked about the problem of singing the blues once one has made so much money from doing so, noted the hardship of musicians’ making money (they are then harnessed by recording companies to make more). Hendrix was overworked and deeply ambivalent: “Actually, the more money you make the more blues you can sing,” he told Dick Cavett. Stills himself wandered into fame’s trappings: cars, drugs, horses, country houses (one in England purchased from Ringo Starr), seven children both in and out of wedlock, fine wines, ex-wives. (His first wife, the singer Véronique Sanson, was the daughter of celebrated French Resistance fighters; “My French never got over the hump, you know?” he said of that divorce, and one imagines that “Marianne” was written about her.) David Crosby, on the other hand, who drifted toward addiction and eventually solitary confinement in a Texas penitentiary, was Hollywood royalty, the privileged son of Floyd Crosby, the renowned cinematographer of High Noon.

Sometimes the desire to make music fuses nicely with the need to make a living. Stills was always focused and driven, although these qualities are usually attributed to his intermittent and more sober partner, Graham Nash (we could drink a case of Nash and still be on our feet). Change Partners chronicles Stills’s doggedness, his durability, his formation and re-formation of bands, beginning (after some pavement-pounding in Greenwich Village) in Los Angeles in 1966 when he assembled Buffalo Springfield (named after a steamroller that was repaving streets), which included Richie Furay, Bruce Palmer, and Neil Young, who had just driven down from Canada in his legendary hearse, ostensibly to locate the actual “77 Sunset Strip.” Tom Petty described Stills’s guitar-playing at that time as “fluid and bluesy” and Young’s as “fuzzy and angry.” For decades after, Crosby, Stills, Nash, and Young kept reemerging in various configurations, though each member was determined to do his own solo records. Hence producer Ahmet Ertegun’s title for their first live album, 4 Way Street.

Backstage at the Ryman this spring, before the show, Stills sits at a table and signs merchandise. When it’s my turn in line, I hand him a fan letter and he sticks it respectfully and unopened in the inner pocket of his black sport jacket. (That women’s jackets don’t have these intimate pockets is a sorrow to me, though a boon to the handbag industry.) He is wearing thick, clear-framed glasses, has a silvering goatee, and his hair shines with a light caramel hue, a reminder of his blond youthful beauty. In the Roberts book women speak repeatedly of Stills’s handsomeness and his shyness. People were drawn to him. Black musicians on the road and elsewhere often found Stills the member of CSNY with whom they could most connect, and Roberts seems to attribute this to Stills’s southern, country-boy roots. Hendrix wanted Stills to join his band and was seeking him out to do so shortly before he died.

For a stretch Stills was also the only one in the band who could vote—Crosby had felonies, Nash was English, Young Canadian. He has long been engaged by politics, especially midterm elections, and while active in presidential campaigns from JFK onward (in the fall of 2016 he wrote a protest song against Trump), he has also made appearances on behalf of local congressmen across the country, urging Americans to think about our government’s legislative branch. He began doing this with some success during the Nixon administration, helping to create Tip O’Neill’s House of Representatives, and we should expect similar efforts in 2018. In 2000 Stills was part of the Democratic Credentials Committee from Florida during the Democratic National Convention and in previous years served as a delegate.

Perhaps because I work at a university, after taking my letter, Stills mentions to me that he recently received an honorary doctorate from McGill. Because he has been a working musician since he was a teenager and never went to college, he is visibly proud and amused by this. He says he is going to do a project with the neurologist Daniel Levitin, the author of This Is Your Brain on Music. I don’t mention the Roberts book, which makes no reference to this and is probably not a book Stills has even read, though there is a handy index for skimming. Stills signs our CDs, and we thank him and moved on. There is a line forming of fans hoping to have their photos taken with him, and out of a fear of carnivals and cameras my friend and I do not get in it. My head is full of Stills’s songs, one of which from decades ago includes these words: “Help me…/My life is a miserable comedy/Of strangers posing as friends” (“Love Story”).

Stills tolerates the backstage meet-’n-greet/merch-perch rather well, although there is little revel in his demeanor—how could there be? He’s a trouper, a player, a generous musician with his audience and his bandmates. But he is not an award-winning actor. In interviews he tends toward quiet diplomacy, restraint, a dry quip. His signature costumes on stage and album covers have been football jerseys, military jackets, and ponchos.

Resilience then is the theme. Stills is one of the last remaining rock-and-roll geniuses from a time when rock music was the soundtrack to an antiwar movement—“For What It’s Worth,” “Woodstock,” “Ohio” (about the 1970 Kent State shootings)—back when the global counterculture was on the left rather than the right. Roberts’s book makes this inexactly clear. Stills has been on the scene from the start, forming Buffalo Springfield when Jimi Hendrix was being booked as the opening act for the Monkees on tour. He has seemingly played with everyone—from Bill Withers to George Harrison. He was the first person to be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice in one night, for his work in Buffalo Springfield and Crosby, Stills & Nash. “What a wonderfully strange and beautiful cast of characters life has handed to me,” he said in his acceptance speech.

On the Ryman stage Stills cuts loose with the young, strapping Kenny Shepherd. Stills often steps back, in a paternal fashion, to let the Shreveport-born Shepherd do his Delta blues thing, long blond hair flying. Spotlights move around the stage searchingly. Stills lets Barry Goldberg, the seventy-four-year-old keyboardist, play his best-known song, “I’ve Got to Use My Imagination” (a 1974 hit for Gladys Knight and the Pips). Congenitally deaf in one ear and now partially deaf in the other, Stills is brave to attempt his own “Bluebird,” with its difficult singing, and on its high notes his voice becomes a bit of a bray. “I’ve always sung flat,” he has said smilingly into cameras, and this embrace of time’s wear and tear feels spiritually strong and unself-pitying. Soon he unbegrudgingly performs what has become something of an albatross for him, his hit single “Love the One You’re With.” The human jukebox aspect of a concert is difficult to avoid.

He shakes out his hands to rid them of pain. Colorful, freshly tuned guitars are brought in at regular intervals. At one point he takes off his jacket and flings it across the stage. “Oh, well,” I say to my friend. “There goes my letter.” The band closes with Neil Young’s “Rockin’ in the Free World.” (It is a custom of Stills’s concerts to include one song by Young.) Shepherd remains a gifted, impeccable, shiny part of it all. But Stills is the one we love. He’s the one we’re with.

EMAIL PRINT

ALSO IN THIS ISSUE
—— AUGUST 17, 2017 ——
 Tenants Under Siege: Inside New York City’s Housing Crisis
New York’s Housing Crisis
Michael Greenberg
 The True American
The True American
Robert Pogue Harrison
 God’s Gift to Men
God’s Gift to Men
Zoë Heller
 Twelve Ways of Looking at Frank Lloyd Wright
12 Ways of Looking at Frank Lloyd Wright
Martin Filler
MORE
 NYR Daily


Our Hackable Democracy
Sue Halpern

The Terrorists Go Shopping
J. Hoberman

Wagner on Trial
Larry Wolff

Art and Imitation
Ruth Bernard Yeazell

Repression in Rwanda
Anjan Sundaram
Home Contact Us About Subscribe Advertise University Press Listing Independent Press Listing Customer Service Help/FAQ Books Terms of Service Feeds Newsletters
© 1963-2017 NYREV, Inc. All rights reserved.




Washingtonian.com

 Jeni Stepanek’s Last Heartsong
Jeni Stepanek’s Last Heartsong
Her son was a celebrity, the little boy poet with the devastating rare disease who earned a following around the world. Fighting that same illness—and now, a constellation of other afflictions—the Rockville resident looks back on what a brief but wondrous thing it was to be Mattie Stepanek's mom.
Written by Justin Heckert | Published on July 30, 2017
 TWEET   SHARE
Matthew Joseph Thaddeus Stepanek bled from his fingertips when he wrote. And he was writing a lot at the end of his life, when he was one of the most famous boys in the world. He left red traces on the computer he used to type his poetry, and on notebook paper when he wrote in pencil, and on his electronic piano, which he was learning to play, sitting in his wheelchair practicing Bach’s Minuet in G. He was barely a teenager. When he described the rare disease that caused the bleeding, he wrote with a keening grace—there was a storm inside him, and he knew it would never allow him to grow up. “I am both living and dying at the same time,” he said, explaining to his mother that his body was failing but his mind and spirit were alive. His mother called him Mattie.

There was a storm inside Mattie’s mother, too. The same rare disorder, dysautonomic mitochondrial myopathy, a condition similar to muscular dystrophy. Jeni Stepanek, watching her son from audiences and green rooms, from the kitchen table of their one-room apartment as he wrote, as her son’s books of poetry—Heartsongs and the six that followed—became improbable national bestsellers. As he became a regular on Oprah and Larry King and established an unlikely friendship with Jimmy Carter, who called him “the most extraordinary person who I have ever known.” Jeni’s life, in many ways, being Mattie’s.

He was so famous that it was Jeni who kept stalkers out of his room at Children’s hospital in DC—the boy poet with a gap between his front teeth and a tracheostomy tube in his throat that looked like a plastic necktie. Jeni who let him use the alias Sean Astin, the actor who played Samwise in his favorite series of movies, Lord of the Rings. Jeni who loved another alias he wanted to use, Paprika, a word he almost sang, to nurses, “PAPRIKA! PAH-PREE-KA!”

Jeni who played Scrabble with him in the hospital, the board stained red from where his fingers had placed the tiles. Jeni who let him keep a remote-controlled fart machine, which he activated every morning during the doctors’ rounds. A mother who slept on the waiting room couch and on the tile floor, keeping the curtain around his bed open so he never felt alone and the light on near the bed because he was afraid of the dark.

It was Jeni who used a softer word for everything Mattie was afraid of, describing the spectre of his medical crises, his thoughts of death, as “hesitations.”

Jeni, also bound to a wheelchair, who drove him in a full-size Econoline on speaking tours across America, Jeni who came up with a game to see which of them could name the most cereals, who in mountains and deserts sat in the seat while her son was asleep, in awe of what had become of their lives. It was Jeni, aghast, at McDonald’s, where strangers pushed napkins for him to sign under his restroom stall, asking him to please tell them something profound—one person asking him to bless the baby in her stomach. Jeni was there when Oprah kissed Mattie on the forehead, anointing him. The same show on which Mattie first described “heartsong,” the word that endeared him to the world. “It’s a message in my heart,” he said. “A heartsong doesn’t have to be a song. It can be your message, your feeling—some people might even call it a conscience. Even though that’s not really what it is. It’s what you feel you need to do.”

A made-up word, one of many in his poetry, which Jeni encouraged. “I don’t know the real word, but this is the word I’m using,” he said.

“It’s better than a real word,” she replied.

He died a month shy of 14. It was Jeni who was next of kin at the funeral best remembered for Jimmy Carter’s eulogy, who would look in on the Rockville park named after Mattie in 2008, who would remember the hilarious but also heartbreaking things Mattie used to say to her: “Weird Al is an absolute genius” and “My muscles feel like sour milk, and my heart feels like burning ice cream.” One of the last was “Do not lie down in the ashes of my life,” as though it were a line of his prose. Then he used another made-up word: “Take my message forthward.”

For the past 13 years, that’s what Jeni has done—honored his made-up word. Through her gradually failing heart and weakening muscles, through cancer and weekly rounds of chemo, through fibrosis of her intestine and a dozen other dysautonomic symptoms that are no longer just a storm in the distance, she has continued talking about him, his words still motivating her on the days when she doesn’t want to get out of bed. Jeni doesn’t have much time left; she is dying herself. But her son’s poetry, his proclamations, everything he left behind—she’s still spreading his message, while she still can, trying to figure out how to make it last forever.


Jeni Stepanek, aka “Mama Peace,” photographed at the Rockville park dedicated to her son Mattie. Now 58, she outlived her four children, all of whom had a devastating condition similar to muscular dystrophy. Photo by Jeff Elkins.
Stories about him were ultimately the story of her—the story of a mother’s love. He occupied 5,089 days in the middle of her life, the only one of her children who lived long enough for her to really get to know. The story of his ascension into the zeitgeist, and of his legacy, of his sense of humor, his kindnesses, his frustrations, his “hesitations”—now, at 58, those are stories she uses to explain the woman she has turned out to be, frail of body but strong in every other way. Starting with the story of how he was born.

The first thing she remembers is a sensation, and not merely the kicking and rustling in her stomach that only a mother could describe, but a different one that came to haunt her—a sensation of immutable dread. She was terrified that he would suffer, and then he would be gone. “When I found out I was pregnant with him, I cried and cried and cried,” she says. “Not because I didn’t want him but because I was aware of the suffering the child would go through. Most doctors suggested that I terminate the pregnancy, and many of my friends and most of my family thought I was an absolute monster to even get pregnant again. [I could only explain that] I would help this child develop some sense of purpose, no matter how short or how much suffering the life would have.”

Jeni’s first child, Katie, was born in 1985. She had dark hair and blue eyes and couldn’t regulate her autonomic systems—her heart rate, breathing, digestion, blood pressure. She died suddenly at 20 months old. Jeni was told Katie was a fluke of nature, one in a billion odds of ever happening again. The same thing happened with Stevie, though. A little gob of skin with bright-blue eyes and red hair, born four weeks early with the same symptoms. He died when he was six months old.

“At this point, I was totally devastated,” Jeni says. “I lost two babies in eight months—doctors had no clue why. They did say this had to be genetic: two kids, same symptoms. The odds of having a third child with this were almost impossible.”

Early in 1989, Jamie was born, and it was clear that he had the same condition—the unnamed thing. Rather than wait for him to get sick, the doctors put him on life support, and for a long time that worked. Though he was tethered to oxygen, by the time he was 15 months old, he was actually singing the ABCs and counting his 123s. He lived like that for almost two years, and then he went into cardiac arrest after being in septic shock and was in a persistent vegetative state until he died at almost four years old.

Mattie was the most fragile—no one thought he would survive his first night. He needed CPR more than once, and most doctors were encouraging Jeni to institutionalize him. She was advised not to bond with him and was told to let whatever was killing him run its course. Doctors told her she was making him suffer by keeping him alive, and even if he did survive, it was highly improbable that he would walk, talk, or think like a typical child.

I LOST TWO BABIES IN EIGHT MONTHS—DOCTORS HAD NO CLUE WHY. THEY DID SAY THIS HAD TO BE GENETIC: TWO KIDS, SAME SYMPTOMS. THE ODDS OF HAVING A THIRD CHILD WITH THIS WERE ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE.
As Mattie turned two, and with both him and Jamie needing full-time care, Jeni was especially exhausted and mentioned as much to her doctor, who noticed her drooping eyelids, a symptom of neuromuscular disease. She had a biopsy, which revealed not only that she had the adult form of dysautonomic mitochondrial myopathy but also that this rare condition, now named, would certainly kill Mattie, as it had her other children, and maybe eventually her.

Yet as Mattie continued to live, Jeni’s dread turned into something else. She saw that he was an especially empathic child. By the time he was 14 months old, at a church picnic, with a trach in his throat, when other children were crying, he would walk around and kiss them each on the head. At three, he was reading billboards and writing, scribbling—he would recite to her how he felt about his dying brother, whom he called Mamie, and she saw him teach his stuffed animals the stories, and now her dread had been replaced by something like awe. When he was four, he heard about the Oklahoma City bombing on TV. Jeni told him, “Let’s pray for the victims,” and Mattie, though he was unable to articulate what the word meant to him, said, “No, let’s pray for the person who did it; they don’t have peace in their heart.”

To be his mother was to watch him often from a distance, sitting in the thick of a crowd. To see people run up to him, squeal for him, hug him, need him. But before she was a celebrity mother, when she was just the person who knew him better than anyone, Jeni rented one-room apartments with leaky floors where he’d hold his pencils with bleeding fingertips and read 20 to 30 books a week. History, science, literature. He really didn’t like algebra. “Why do I need it if I’ll never grow up?” he asked. Sometimes she had the two of them living in basements, where he wrote at a small table for hours on end, at night under a blanket with a flashlight, his own little cave. They lived in a Marriott hotel for a while and with someone in a retirement village for a week, and spent the night in the hospital atrium even when he didn’t need to be there, dreaming of what it might be like to have a fancy meal or two beds.



Jeni ended her marriage when Mattie was in first grade, and a judge granted her sole custody. She had insurance through the University of Maryland, where she was studying for her PhD in early-childhood special education, but she decided to postpone her degree to take care of him. She had two jobs—one at a nonprofit that was sold, leaving only her research assistantship at UMD, which paid a stipend of just $5,000 a year. She began to homeschool Mattie when he was nine because of his deteriorating health. This allowed him—a boy who’d read Moby-Dick several times and the works of F. Scott Fitzgerald—to begin auditing college courses, too.

In 2001, Mattie was admitted to the hospital and was so sick that he was asked what his three wishes were. He wanted to publish his poetry. Meet Jimmy Carter. And appear on Oprah. “The problem,” remembers Oprah field producer Shelly Heesacker, “is that a lot of people have a dying wish to meet Oprah.” When Shelly went to Rockville to see if Mattie was a fit for an episode called “How Does That Feel?,” she was going to ask him several different ways, How does it feel to have a neuromuscular disease?, wondering if he could even articulate the answer. They rolled tape . . . and he started talking about world peace. Eleven minutes and 43 seconds into the interview, she looked back at the camera for the time code, because she was so shocked at what she was hearing. He was 11 years old. “There was nothing normal about him. He looked like a kid, but he talked from a perspective that was beyond his years. At one point, I just said, ‘Well, why is peace so important to you?’ And he said, ‘We’re fighting over our differences, and our differences are our true beauty. We’re a mosaic of gifts and I can’t understand why we can’t get along like me and my mommy do.’ I thought: Does he even know what mosaic means?”

Shelly told her boss to tell Oprah: This is bigger than just one segment of one show. Jeni remembers the moment—when the credits started to roll on that first episode, October 19, 2001, 4:59 pm EST. Mattie had been a local celebrity in Washington, on the news in stories about a singular family with a rare disease, but during that episode, Oprah talked to Mattie for several segments more than scheduled. Afterward, he was on Good Morning America and on Larry King, wearing suspenders in homage to the host. To watch Mattie on TV was to comprehend the urgency of him, his tiny body wiggling in his giant wheelchair amid the tubes that kept him alive, the chair an omnipresent life-support system like a frame around him wherever he went. But there was something about him, something about the way he looked, the way he sounded—his small voice interrupted nearly every second by the oxygen from his trach—that connected with audiences. He seemed upbeat while talking about what he knew to be a terminal illness, a kid who had been dealt the worst hand, softly whittling a gigantic idea down so everyone could understand it. In a post-9/11 world where people were newly terrified, it was as if they wanted to hear him soothe them, to tell them peace was possible.

jeni-mattie-bush
mattie-jimmy-carter
jeni-bono
Mattie and Jeni were befriended by all kinds of politicians and celebrities—Laura Bush, Jimmy Carter, Bono—enamored with Mattie’s post-9/11 message of peace. Photographs of Laura Bush and Bono by Getty Images. Other photographs courtesy of Jeni Stepanek.


Oprah and Mattie began to call each other, e-mail each other every week. She helped him find a publisher who would mass-produce his books, and she bought Jeni the Econoline to go meet his readers across the country. They’d drive while singing the Pizza Hut song and arrive at a book signing, where thousands of people waited to see the boy who slept with Mr. Bunny. The same boy who could be a surly 13-year-old, shouting and slamming the door in his mother’s face. Who wanted to hang out with his friend Chris Dobbins and an older crowd of teenagers, guys who smoked cigarettes, who had tattoos, who watched R-rated movies and talked about girls.

I WISH I COULD’VE SAID HIS FAME MADE ME FEEL REALLY GOOD, BUT I CAN’T. IT WAS BOTH WONDERFUL AND OVERWHELMING AT THE SAME TIME.
For Jeni, there was a mix of pride and trepidation, thinking about how her son no longer completely belonged to her. Watching Maya Angelou, the poet Mattie most revered, have him sit with her at a book signing. Hearing her tell him, “Some of your poetry is profound, some of it is simply pleasant.” Being at the Mall of America in front of a crowd that filled every level, and with Jerry Lewis at the Muscular Dystrophy Association Telethon. Being at an event where a mother came up to his wheelchair and grabbed the handles and, manically, refused to let go until security had to intervene. Looking above his bed in their apartment in the later years and seeing the poster of Liv Tyler he had kissed so much that he rubbed her lips away. Knowing he was also in love with Emma Watson, whom he would eventually meet. Remembering that Amazon reviewers castigated him, complaining that the whole thing was made up and the only reason any of it had ever happened was because he was sick.

This was happening while Jeni herself was diminishing. It was happening while Mattie was in the hospital coughing up blood, while the trach had denuded his airway, the skin sloughing off, and while he was having bouts of respiratory distress. She’d meet with doctors to go over every possible treatment they could think of—would the side effects kill him?—and ask Mattie his opinion on how to proceed.

“I wish I could’ve said it made me feel really good, but I can’t,” Jeni says of her son’s fame. “It was both wonderful and overwhelming at the same time. And I still feel that. I have to tell you, it honestly wasn’t until years after he died that I began to get a sense of who my son really was in this world.”

Jeni learned that studying people was one of Mattie’s gifts, to say nothing of his way with words. One of his favorite things was to ride his wheelchair to the coffee shop or the ice-cream parlor. He would go to the local Safeway and introduce himself when people walked through the sliding doors—he knew the manager there, and the butcher. She knew him not as some wunderkind, some magical boy, but as a kid who sprayed whipped cream into his mouth every year on the last day of school, who cried when he held his best friend’s daughter, knowing he would never have a daughter of his own. She remembered how much she loved to hear him talk, to sit and have tea with him at the little table in their condo in the afternoon.

But there was one thing she didn’t want to think about, or even entertain. From 2003 to 2004, after he turned 13, he wanted to talk to her about this feeling that he was going to die, and about her plans after he was gone. She wouldn’t listen. He told her best friend, Sandy Newcomb, “You’ve got to tell my mother I’m dying.”

“He was saying, I don’t see summer camp, I don’t see Thanksgiving. This is going to happen, I don’t know when, but it’s happening. And you need to accept this. It was during those months that I really did not do what I should’ve done for my son,” Jeni says. “I was there for him. But I could not be there with him. I’ll regret that till my dying breath. Saying to him, ‘I’m sorry, I’m scheduled to have coffee with Sandy,’ or ‘Hold that thought, buddy.’ I did everything I could to end the conversation quickly. Even in his final weeks, I encouraged him to be strong. I should’ve just sat there and held him.”

Mattie went to the hospital in March 2004 and had three separate cardiac arrests—the first stopped his heart for 45 minutes. He was revived each time, and his eyes opened up, but in them was a heartbreaking sheen of recognition. Eventually, his muscles contracted so tightly that he lost the ability to speak. Even his bones began to break. He never went home.

“I would go in and give him a bath while Jeni was resting,” Sandy says. “He got dystonia. His hands got so tight that the circulation cut off, his fingernails came off. By the end, his tongue was so tight in his mouth—it came from damage in the basal ganglia, part of the disease progression. I said, ‘Wow, look at that, your arm moved more than it usually does!’ And he just looked at me, and this tear rolled down. I said, ‘I know—it’s not moving as much as you would like it to.’ ”

It was breaking news when he died, across the world. Sean Astin, Mattie’s favorite actor, showed up in Washington in a taxi after he heard and said, “I didn’t know what else to do.” He and a small group of family and friends and some firefighters Mattie had befriended after 9/11 attended the private viewing at the funeral home. Jeni was comforted that Sean just sat with the family, and they stayed up late that night in her condo, the night before the funeral, when thousands came. Afterward, Jeni buried Mattie with, among other toys, Mr. Bunny and his fart machine.

In the months after, when she was no longer at the hospital talking to nurses and doctors who had become friends, no longer caring for Mattie, Jeni lost the will to live—she decided to lie in bed until she died. She figured it would take 13 days. This hit her around 13 months after he was gone, in the summer of 2005. “I thought, ‘I can’t go back to normal,’ ” she says. “Normal, for me, was parenting him.”

I WAS THERE FOR HIM. BUT I COULD NOT BE THERE WITH HIM. I’LL REGRET THAT TILL MY DYING BREATH.
Her friend Sandy, who at the time lived in the condo next door, said, “You haven’t come for coffee. Are you coming over?”

“No, I’m done.”

Sandy sat on the bedroom floor and refused to leave. Sandy, who had met Jeni a year before Mattie was born and helped raise him, said, “I understand that this is hard, I respect that, I’m not going to let you go through this alone. . . . You can’t just stay here and die. What if you get hungry?” She volunteered to sit with Jeni.

Jeni said, “Fine, suit yourself, stay here.” She harrumphed and rolled over in bed. Eventually, when Sandy wouldn’t leave, Jeni rolled out of bed and into her chair.

“You’ve changed your mind, then?”

“No,” Jeni said. “I’m getting up to roll over you.”

For a while, Jeni kept a journal about her life without Mattie. She realized what he’d told her when he said “forthward”—he had commissioned her to take what he left but to use it how she wanted. She didn’t speak like him, didn’t write like him, and now there were all these empty places where he used to be. But she reshaped his message in her own voice, and that was a power that opened up her life. “I take what he left behind,” she says. “Some of it exactly as it is; some of it I’ve repackaged so it fits better with how I speak, how I teach.”

She was in a wheelchair; she always would be. She was using oxygen; she’d always need to. Her muscles were weakening, but she otherwise began to flourish.

She turned his message into a small industry. In the years after he died, she took the trading cards he’d made and had more printed to distribute them, each with a quote from him or a line from a poem. Cards for resilience, service, education, a card for choices to balance blessings and burdens. Kids could pass them around and never forget him. She helped raise money in his name to send 30 teenagers from around the world to New York to teach them about Mattie and his core belief: We are a mosaic of gifts. It was the Just Peace Summit, and Jeni sat onstage and told the students her own story, teaching them how to write an elevator pitch, a proposal, a grant. She got the nickname Mama Peace.

“When I think of Jeni, I never think of her as someone who’s sick,” says Lulu Cerone, who attended the summit in 2012. “That’s not what comes to mind. I think of her as someone who’s strong and wise. She’s optimistic without it being contrived. She always has hope, even in the most dire situations.”

The town of Rockville took a plot of land and established a park dedicated to Mattie. Jeni worked with a graphic artist who read his books to design the layout. She became head of the Mattie JT Stepanek Foundation, an endeavor to promulgate, as he said, that “peace is possible.”

Jeni had promised Mattie she would get her PhD, and she did, in 2008, with honors. She began to teach at the University of Maryland, and was traveling, and appearing on Oprah’s 20th-anniversary special to talk about Mattie’s life. She looked well and happy.

Then two years ago, she got cancer.

“I’ve outlived all my prognoses,” Jeni Stepanek says.

It’s May 2017, a bright day in Rockville, and she is wearing a funny T-shirt with a T-rex cartoon, her graying hair cut short, and she has small round glasses and dangling earrings in the shape of peace signs. Barely visible beneath the shirtsleeve on her right arm is a medicine port that goes into her heart. She is drinking a glass of red wine. Sitting in her chair on the hardwood floor of a kitchen in a big house she shares with Sandy and Sandy’s family, she is describing herself as decrepit and chuckling with a shrug of her shoulders. “I have so many conditions that when you treat one, it exacerbates another one. And then if you treat that, you trigger this over here. I’m constantly slapping Band-Aids on my body systems.”

In 2015, she went to the hospital, hemorrhaging out of the blue. She was diagnosed with cancer and had surgery to remove it; she then began weekly chemo with daily radiation. But the chemo treatments damaged her kidneys, and the radiation caused fibrosis of her intestines due to her underlying disease. Effectively beginning the end of her life.

She can feel it now, and see it. All over her body. Swollen feet with severe pitting edema—she keeps them, unmoving, in a Redskins cozy on the chair. Her feet feel as if they’re going to pop. Her heart beats too fast, and sometimes too slow. She needs open-heart surgery as well as surgery to correct her scarring intestines, which could burst at any time; they cause her to vomit a few times a week, but surgery is much too risky to repair any part of her. She has a soft, almost scratchy voice. Every few seconds, she turns her head slightly to her right and places her lips on a tube connected to a tank of oxygen, which kicks an automatic gust of air into her lungs.

“It’s always something,” she says, in the same manner that Mattie explained his disease to Larry King. “How is it that I’m sitting here today, in 2017, divorced, disabled, juggling multiple life-threatening disabilities? I would say I have, relatively speaking, some shreds of sanity. And . . . I am happy. I am a woman who is filled with gratitude. I am rooted in a motto. Celebrate life, some way.”

In the Rockville house across from Mattie’s park that Jeni now shares with Sandy’s family, they celebrate life. Two kids are running around, Sandy and her son and his wife are yelling jokes, and the big bulldog, Bentley, is romping about. Though Jeni struggled to make a resolution in 2017, for the first time in her life—though she can feel something coming, like a premonition—she does not seem burdened by it.

Jeni is an obsessively organized person, a trait she makes fun of—a coping mechanism. To pass the time as a kid, she liked to draw. She would sketch houses, city blocks, yards, fences, a community. She would name each of the families. “I would go crazy if they weren’t in the right order,” she says. “I needed to be putting order into the world. The planning of order, which mattered more than playing it out. Planning a fictional party—not having it.”

Her CDs are in alphabetical order, her socks arranged by color, sometimes by fabric, and food in the cabinet by nutritional group. That tendency is something she gave to Mattie, who had to flip a light switch three times before leaving a room.


Oprah said Jeni’s son Mattie was one of only a handful of guests on her show whom she ever befriended, and called Jeni “one of the most inspiring mothers I’ve ever met.”
“After Mattie died, I started thinking: What is my heartsong? I thought it was to be a mother. But his message is that you give your heartsong away. I realized all my life, I struggled with knowing that I mattered. Knowing that I had purpose. As a child, I felt like I mattered only if I pleased someone. That mattering was contingent on things that I did. As a parent, I began to realize that’s what I had been giving my children across those 20 years—I was giving them the gift of knowing you matter. And to love for the sheer sake of loving and expecting nothing in return.”

Every morning, she pushes herself off the bed and into the bedroom where she organized some of his things, a room thick with his memory, his presence. His Mead composition notebooks full of drawings and ruminations, his journals. A collage of photos that keep him in view, on a board directly facing the bed, the boy in the round glasses and floppy fishing hat all those years ago, in his wheelchair with his friends, wearing his red robe and black belt in karate, an oxygen tank beside him. The letters she still receives from prisoners at Rikers Island, who had discovered Heartsongs.

“I think about the end of my life and I say . . . okay,” she says. “Which to me is a combination of Mattie’s message. He says: Peace begins with being able to say I’m okay. And that can only happen if your basic needs are met. Then once you’re okay, peace is when you can look at your neighbors and say: Are you okay?

“I’ve never witnessed more physical suffering than what he went through. He would be in pain, but he would think of other people, and he challenged me—he told me, ‘Choose to inhale.’ I draw strength from that.”

He would have been 27 in July, gone nearly as long as he’d been alive. And if she were to be gone next year, then she was determined to keep Peace Day going. The day is an annual celebration of Mattie’s teachings timed to his birthday, usually a day with balloons and cake and fireworks. Normally she would have organized it herself, across the street in his own park, but she couldn’t now—she was too weak, so the mayor of Rockville was sitting in her living room in May helping her plan, Jeni scrolling through her iPhone.

“We’re going to start hanging advertisements around the city,” Jeni said. They showed the face of Mattie’s statue, wearing a birthday hat beneath the slogan “Make Peace the News!”

Jeni met with the owner of the King Farm neighborhood restaurant Botanero, where the party would start—Sandy’s son Chris would be the guest bartender, making Sunset Cervezas, in homage to Mattie’s favorite time of day. Then the party would spill into the little park next door, with tents, the city closing the streets. Jeni pictured a deejay, and revelers going around to different peace activities, learning about Mattie. A local band would perform. Her dream, her mission, was to get a day on the national calendar that celebrated Mattie’s message of peace. That’s how Mattie always thought—in big terms. Rockville’s mayor had agreed to write the day into permanent commemoration in the town. It was a first step.



Jeni could see Mattie’s park through the windows of the house. It was wide and green and glistening in the summer, children climbing on the swing set. After the meeting, she put on a green visor and sunglasses and took her wheelchair around to the back of the house, down the ramp in the garage, and down the sidewalk.

The wheelchair made a constant whir as she went up the concrete pathway, casting a last, square shadow, past benches carved with sentences Mattie had written—“Remember to play after every storm!”—then to the kiosk that marked the peace garden: “Peace is possible . . . it can begin simply, over a game of chess and a cup of tea.” Pressing each of the four buttons on the kiosk makes Mattie’s voice crackle to life and say something different. She paused there for a minute, then looked at the statue of her son in the middle of the circle. The short hair, in bronze. The trach wrapping up to his neck, in bronze. The bronze gap between his two front teeth, the bronze khakis, the bronze book in his lap. His bronze dog, Micah. Sometimes when she went out to see him, she found flowers at his feet or plastic glasses on his nose.

Tonight, a group of teenagers came, giggling, breaking the silence. They were looking around at the chess tables surrounding the statue, the football field beyond, the tables made of stone, where they sat down. Jeni was just away from him, the wheelchair and its equipment framing her, on top of the personalized bricks—WE CHOOSE PEACE, the Dimick Family; Miss U Mattie, LOVE Ron and Helen. Two families were walking the sidewalk. The group gathered around the kiosk near Mattie’s statue. Jeni watched them silently, the visor protecting her face from the dwindling sun.

Mattie’s favorite color was the sunset—orange, purple, with a tinge of bright pink. Jeni often sat with him on a pier in the Outer Banks, where they vacationed with Sandy’s family, watching him watch that particular color. It was the place where he described to her both how close he felt to death and how much closer to something greater, his presence fading, his purpose growing, as the color—colors—he saw faded and darkened beyond the line of the ocean. He had written during his last year, I just like being able to see / The sunrise, and sunset, every day / in one piece, and have the breath / To say, “thank You” for such gifts / Here, I will stop leaving memories / For this Time Capsule, / So ten, fifteen, / However many years later, / You may remember these things / That mattered to a teen named Mattie.

One of her favorite pictures was taken when she’d stumbled on him once, alone, standing there, back when he had the strength to stand—looking at the water and sky, his small head silhouetted in a line of the fading sun. She had wondered what he was feeling, what he was thinking. And when she was in the park, his park, with the families looking at the statue of her son, in the sunset, beneath his color, silently considering him as if he were on their pier, the lambent light fading from orange to purple, both living and dying at the same time, she knew.

Justin Heckert (@justinheckert on Twitter) has written for GQ, ESPN the Magazine, and Garden & Gun.

 SHARE  TWEET
TAGGED IN: Heartsongs, Jeni Stepanek, Mattie Stepanek
The best news, delivered straight to your inbox.
Sign up for our weekend newsletter.

Email Address
GO
More from News
Under DC Law, Ryan Lizza Didn’t Need to Ask Scaramucci’s Permission to Record Phone Call
Under DC Law, Ryan Lizza Didn’t Need to Ask Scaramucci’s Permission to Record Phone Call
ACLU, Milo Yiannopoulos, Women’s Health Clinic, and PETA Sue Metro Over Advertising Policies
Politics and Prose to Open New Bookstore at the Wharf
Politics and Prose to Open New Bookstore at the Wharf
A DC Guy Planned Six Dates in a Single Night—and All the Women Found Out
A DC Guy Planned Six Dates in a Single Night—and All the Women Found Out
NPR’s Newest Podcast Goes for Longform International Reporting
NPR’s Newest Podcast Goes for Longform International Reporting
Take Our 2017 Online Reader Survey!
Take Our 2017 Online Reader Survey!
America’s Oldest Living Drug Advice Columnist Tells All
America’s Oldest Living Drug Advice Columnist Tells All
A Herd of Wild Ponies Swim a Virginia Channel Every Year, and the Photos Are Pure Magic
A Herd of Wild Ponies Swim a Virginia Channel Every Year, and the Photos Are Pure Magic
Most Popular
A DC Guy Planned Six Dates in a Single Night—and All the Women Found Out
24 Healthy, Nutritionist-Approved Lunches You Can Find at Chipotle, Subway, Panera, and More
4 Epic Treehouses Near DC You Can Rent for a Memorable Night Away
Frolic Through This Virginia Sunflower Field Before the Summer Ends
7 Fun Food Events Around DC This Weekend

© 2017 Washingtonian Media Inc.
Privacy Policy
All Rights Reserved.
Washingtonian is a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising fees by advertising and linking to Amazon.com.
 Rss
Get the best news, delivered weekly.

Enter your email address
GO
By signing up, you agree to our terms.
Subscribe
Manage My Subscription
Digital Edition
iPad App
Newsletters
About Us
Advertise With Us
Contact Us
Jobs
By using this site, you agree to the Privacy Policy and Terms of Use.

NFL
NBA
World Football
MLB
NHL
MMA
WWE
CFB
More
Trending
Mag
Tickets
Get The App
Sign UpLogin

THE HUNGRIEST MAN ON EARTH
Aaron Gibson weighed 480 pounds, but a life of lingering pain—and pill-popping, and the disappointment of the NFL—weighed on him heavier than that. Then came love. Then 30,000 calories a day turned into 1,500 sit-ups—and abs.
photo of Joon Lee
JOON LEE
JULY 27, 2017
Aaron Gibson recently lost a toe. His left big toe.

A blue-chip prospect out of Wisconsin, Gibson was once the heaviest player in NFL history, officially weighing in at 410 pounds in 2002 with the Dallas Cowboys. The Detroit Lions drafted him 27th overall in 1999, trading three draft picks to the Miami Dolphins to move up 12 spots to select the guy Sports Illustrated deemed "the prototype for the gargantuan linemen of the 21st century." Of course, all of that was before two shoulder injuries left him a fraction of who he once was and derailed a career that ended after 38 games in six seasons, his last in 2004.

Gibson had thought for years that his overeating could lead to gout or diabetes, knowing that a loss of a toe could come with them. But instead the culprit was a poisonous spider bite, the bug finding a way into his shoe during a day working on the backyard koi pond. As the flesh on his left big toe started dissolving, revealing tendons and, soon, bone, Gibson figured this wasn't gout.

The bite looked like a bull's-eye, black in the middle, red and then white. Seventeen days after the swelling started, Aaron, 39, lying in bed, felt a sharp, overwhelming pain in his left hip. His wife Brigitte Gibson abandoned her Costco trip that day to take him to the hospital, where doctors said he needed emergency surgery. His toe had gotten infected from the bite, and the infection had spread to his hip.

Gibson lived a life of near homelessness as a child, constantly shifting between a home and a homeless shelter.
Gibson lived a life of near homelessness as a child, constantly shifting between a home and a homeless shelter.(Joon Lee for B/R Mag)
The doctors initially told Gibson he might lose his entire left leg, but when he woke up from surgery, it was still there. But there was the one digit, floating in a plastic container, in the surgeon's hand. Doctors amputated the toe and removed the infected tissue in his hip with two deep incisions, telling Aaron that if he had decided to sleep that night, he would've died.

"It was a stupid spider bite. It was ugly, but I guessed when it healed, it'd be better," Aaron says. "It hurts, but I've got a lot more pain than that."

After all, a life of lingering pain, always more serious than first expected, has been the one constant in his life.

When the hunger would hit hard during the summers—when there weren't school-provided lunches or food spreads in the locker room—a 16-year-old Aaron Gibson walked an hour to the Broadway branch of the Indianapolis Public Library on 42nd Street, where a summer reading program provided a coupon for free McDonald's french fries and an ice cream cone. It was all a charade: Gibson picking up a book, pretending to read and walking to the front desk, asking for his reward.

Both parties knew he didn't really read the book, but it didn't matter. They'd give him the coupon, and he'd walk 35 minutes to the McDonald's on 38th Street to get what would often be his only meal of the day. By the time he got home, the clock read 10 p.m., the walk alone taking nearly two-and-a-half hours.

Between ages 11 and 17, Aaron and his family moved around 30 times, spending a year in the Dayspring Center homeless shelter. Aaron got used to jumping off the school bus and seeing all of the family's belongings on the curb, every three months or so; the first month rent was paid, the second month unpaid, the third month—evicted. The Gibsons had a microwave, but not a working stove. Sometimes, Aaron says, the only meal of the day would be the leftover crust from a late-night pizza his parents, Richard and Constance, ate the night before. Other times, he and his siblings, Cobree and Adam, picked the meat off the bones of finished KFC chicken wings.

If their kitchen didn't have food—and it usually didn't—Aaron and Constance would go to the church on 29th Street to get a bowl of cereal and a little box of milk. When they were lucky, white cans, reading "BEEF" or "PORK" in bold, black letters, would sit on the counter, a haul from the food pantry. Aaron never complained about eating the scraps of his parents' leftovers or walking a few blocks to the church. Hunger constantly spoke to him, but it was the norm. As a child, he thought this was how everyone lived.

He didn't realize his family was poor until he was 16, when his parents encouraged him to stay at the house of his friend, Hunter Marshall. It seemed like Disneyland. There was a color television, food always on the table and parents always eager to ask how his day was. When Richard and Constance found out about the Marshalls' hospitality, Aaron says, they encouraged him to stay.

"I went hard," Gibson says of his weight loss. "I was not going to stop."
"I went hard," Gibson says of his weight loss. "I was not going to stop."(Joon Lee for B/R Mag)
His first athletic dreams started in the pool, as an Olympic swimmer, and the wrestling ring, but by the time his growth spurt hit, football became his calling. As his star grew on the gridiron, the local media swarmed Aaron, the 6'6" high schooler who weighed around 420 pounds, a product of the Gibson gene. Almost all of the recruitment calls came to the Marshalls' house, and if they didn't, they were directed to the payphone near the window of the house where his parents temporarily resided more than 15 miles away.

As the attention grew, Richard and Constance began speaking to the local media about how proud they were of their son. Richard told reporters of how he got his son started in the weight room after seeing him unable to do push-ups. It never actually happened, Aaron says, but Richard told the fable to the media anyway. This is what Aaron feels is the story of him and his parents: never around until they needed him, gone the second they didn't.

Aaron Gibson remembers that first year of college at Wisconsin, seeing the food in the locker room and dining hall and feeling equal parts overwhelmed and excited. They had everything. Steak. Shrimp. Chicken. Pasta. Marinara. Alfredo. Hot dogs. Eggs. Bacon. Sausage. Lobster once a month. It was everything he didn't have as a child, and it "never wasn't amazing."

"I didn't ever want to be hungry because 'tomorrow,' as a kid, I could not eat," Gibson says. "That wasn't going to happen at Wisconsin, but that was in my head. I ate like that until exhaustion."

Gibson stacked his plate, coming back with three filet-sized steaks and spaghetti, on top of a plateful of sides. He'd sneak things past Wisconsin's strength and conditioning coach, managing to eat, he guesses, 20,000 to 30,000 calories each day.

Badgers teammates and staff worried about Gibson's eating habits, but he continued to produce on the field at nearly 400 pounds, in large part because of his otherworldly athleticism. "I've never seen someone who weighs 400 pounds, can squat 700 pounds, can clean over 400 pounds, can bench over 500 pounds and can do the splits," says Chris McIntosh, Gibson's fellow offensive lineman at Wisconsin.

Gibson, unable to bend over due to his pain, uses a claw to pick up objects. “It hurts, but I’ve got a lot more pain than that.”
Gibson, unable to bend over due to his pain, uses a claw to pick up objects. “It hurts, but I’ve got a lot more pain than that.”(Joon Lee for B/R Mag)
Dunks from the baseline in pickup games: routine. Breaking apples with hand strength alone: a party trick. The standing back flips: standard. All this from a guy who reflexively ducked his head and turned sideways to get through door frames, a guy who wore the biggest helmet Riddell ever manufactured (an 8 ½) and wears a size-18 shoe.

The eating didn't slow down once he got to the NFL. Nakia Codie and Gibson were both rookies with the Detroit Lions when they bonded; through the veteran hazing, through the grueling days of minicamp, they stuck together. Codie liked cooking, which meant Gibson liked hanging out with Codie. At barbecues, Gibson would eat half of the food cooked, the rest split among six or seven people.

"I don't know how he burned it off," Codie says. "How do you eat that much food, and then still be hungry two hours later? … This guy was eating meals every two hours."

With the food came weight, and with the weight came weight clauses. During his rookie season, Gibson says the Lions fined him $80,000 for missing his weight goal of 376 pounds by coming into camp at 390, he says. His second year, the clause said 378, but he played much heavier and got rocked with fines weekly. That's when Gibson knew he needed to do something, and first came across StarCaps, a diuretic pill. For $110 a bottle, Gibson could take the pills, meet his weight goals and not get fined.

They called it Fat Tuesdays, and at first, it was just four guys. On Sundays, Gibson typically played at 384 pounds. On Mondays, he would take nine to 10 StarCaps pills (two to three were recommended) and "piss until it hurt." The group of guys sat in the sauna to sweat everything out, and at home on Mondays, Gibson rode his stationary bike to sweat out the little remaining water. He'd put on plastic bag pants, sweatshirts and hoodies, and sit in the car with the heat on. To top it all off, he'd take Milk of Magnesia, a laxative, to hit the 20 pounds he needed to lose some weeks to make weight and not get fined. By the end of the year, the group grew to eight guys.

"I was still playing at my regular weight on Sunday," Gibson says. "What were they getting? It was a charade."

He used pills to try to fix the pain, too. It started with his left shoulder on the second day of training camp, the third practice of his rookie season. During one-on-one drills, Gibson faced off against Kelvin Pritchett, a veteran defensive lineman who was "grandfather strong." When the whistle blew, Pritchett punched Gibson in the chest. As the defensive end began driving, Gibson's shoulder twisted. The pressure became so great that the bone pushed through the socket, and Gibson's arm dropped. The socket was gone, along with the labrum and rotator cuff, all in an instant.

"You think, 'I'll stop. I'll stop when I stop playing. I'll stop needing the pain medicine,'" Gibson (left) says to B/R Mag. "You feel like when you're done, you're just doing it for football. 'I'm just doing this so I can play. It's not going to affect my life in any way.' And that's wrong."
"You think, 'I'll stop. I'll stop when I stop playing. I'll stop needing the pain medicine,'" Gibson (left) says to B/R Mag. "You feel like when you're done, you're just doing it for football. 'I'm just doing this so I can play. It's not going to affect my life in any way.' And that's wrong."(Getty Images)
Gibson rehabbed the injury and reclaimed his starting job. In his 10th game back, against the Atlanta Falcons, Gibson felt something in his shoulder, this time in his right arm. He tried to stay in the game, but as he took his stance, he felt liquid rushing down his back, which turned out to be blood. The Lions called a timeout, thinking Gibson had dislocated his right shoulder, but when they took off the pads, the bone had broken all the way through, again. Gibson was soon on painkillers, just to feel normal again. Before long, he was taking pills every three hours, 70-80 of them a day. Handfuls of aspirin would hold over Gibson between batches of the stronger stuff.

"You think, 'I'll stop. I'll stop when I stop playing. I'll stop needing the pain medicine,'" Gibson says. "You feel like when you're done, you're just doing it for football. 'I'm just doing this so I can play. It's not going to affect my life in any way.' And that's wrong."

By August 2006, Gibson was done in the NFL, cut by the Buffalo Bills without a game snap, playing at nearly 400 pounds. Three months later, he received a call from his mom. His dad had died in bed, suffocating, his lungs collapsing under his own excessive weight. Gibson saw his own future.

"I knew. I was gonna go out like my dad," Gibson says.

He hung onto football longer than it wanted to hang onto him. Hobbled, the memories of back flips and splits long behind him, Aaron Gibson signed with the Austin Wranglers of the Arena Football League in 2007 and limped through the season. He tried again in 2010 with the Bossier-Shreveport Battle Wings of the AFL, but the pain was worse this time. After just one practice he realized he couldn't play football anymore, but he still dressed for the first game—then broke a bone in his leg. The dream really ended years before, but football was finally over for Gibson, and all of the attention—from family, from people he thought to be friends—disappeared with it.

"It was lonely," Gibson says. "I was by myself and it felt like nobody could understand what was going on."

He moved back to the Dallas suburbs, where he had bought a home during his time with the Cowboys, looking for the stability he never had as a child. He lived alone, divorced after a too-young-to-get-married union that produced a daughter, and weighed 400 pounds. For three years, all he ate was Jack in the Box, McDonald's, Burger King and KFC. For four years, he says, he never ate a fruit or a vegetable alone. The refrigerator in his two-bedroom apartment was empty, save for fast-food leftovers. Pots and pans, still packed in the box, tape and all, sat in the cabinet below the counter, door shut. The moments when he ate were the only moments he felt happy.

The weight kept coming too. He soon gained 80 pounds, topping out at 480.

The pain—from football, from family abandonment, from heartbreak—grew worse by the day, in a life that had come to be defined by everlasting suffering. He'd visit a doctor down the street from his apartment who ran a pay-for-prescription office. When his body called for the opioids, when he'd downed bottles of 120 pills over just three days, Gibson waited two hours to see the doctor for more, one of the few reasons he left the house those days. Everything hurt. Shoulders. Knees. Hips. Legs. Other doctors told him to take insulin and other diabetes medication, with his blood sugar at 450 and 500 when it should have been between 79-100, but Gibson just wanted prescriptions for the pills—for $1,400 a month—that made him feel normal.

“It was lonely,” Gibson says to B/R Mag on his lowest point. “I was by myself and it felt like nobody could understand what was going on.”
“It was lonely,” Gibson says to B/R Mag on his lowest point. “I was by myself and it felt like nobody could understand what was going on.”(Courtesy of Aaron Gibson)
The pain, the pills, the disappointment wore him down. Sometimes, he'd look at himself in the bathroom mirror and yell. I can't handle this. I'm a junkie. You are hooked on these painkillers.

"I'm like, is it me?" Gibson says. "Then everything else just fails. Your body fails you, which was always there for you. My body was always there for me. It was failing me and now I was turning into my father. It all just bothers you, like fuck."

On Christmas Day 2011, Gibson sat, alone, in his apartment watching TV with a plate of grits and eggs. There was no tree, no conversation, no family. There was nobody to share his feelings with, but it's not as though he felt like he even could. By March 2013, he found himself at Green Oaks psychiatric hospital, his wrists cut, and doctors telling him he nearly overdosed on Valium. For six months, the thoughts of suicide constantly occupied his mind.

Just do it, Aaron.

Just do it, Aaron.

Just do it, Aaron.

He wanted it to be quick. He didn't want to suffer like his father did when he died.

One day, as the TV played in the background, Gibson looked down his long hallway and saw the door to his bedroom. It's time, he thought. He waited, and took a breath. There was nothing else to hold onto. He felt close—minutes, maybe seconds away. He could finally end the pain that always lingered, in one form or another. The pain that permeated and defined his life.

It was going to happen, and then it just didn't. That day, Aaron Gibson did not commit suicide. "Say I would've had access to a firearm, I would've shot myself," he says.

"Something else took over."

They'd met once before, in 2004, at the baby shower of a mutual friend, Brigitte remembered. They'd small-talked about being parents. He was still married at the time, but she was already on her own. She'd sworn off dating anyone, without enough time in the day to take care of three kids and pause for a breath. When Aaron walked into that restaurant that night, nearly a decade later, around 6 o'clock, she recognized him.

What she didn’t know was that this was his first night out in a long time, six months after he nearly attempted suicide. She’d worked on so many athletes as a sports massage therapist that his size didn’t even deserve a footnote.

The only reason he'd decided to go out that night was because he'd met Richard Tyson, an actor known for his role in the 1980s film Three O'Clock High who was in town filming. They'd gone to a club that also offered massages. Tyson wanted one, so Aaron decided to talk to Brigitte. He didn't recognize her from their brief encounter, 10 years earlier, but they started talking about being single parents, and slowly, Aaron opened up. Over five hours of music and the chatter of the patrons at the bar, they talked until the restaurant closed.

Gibson credits his wife, Brigitte, for turning around his life.
Gibson credits his wife, Brigitte, for turning around his life.(Joon Lee for B/R Mag)
He wanted to take her to dinner. He seemed like a nice guy, she remembered, thinking back to the baby shower. She'd said she wouldn't date any more professional athletes, but he seemed different, like he actually cared, and so she asked four questions: Do you owe back child support? Do you live with your mom? Are you legally divorced? Do you have a job? When the answers came back no, no, yes and yes (he owned a security company), she gave him her phone number.

Brigitte had a three-hour window to talk every day, so Aaron began to set his alarm. At 9:05, every morning, her phone would ring, and it would be him. She would be working on 3.5 hours of sleep after coming home from work at 3 a.m. before waking up at 6:30 a.m. to drive her kids to school. Brigitte and Aaron would talk, to keep her awake, but also to support each other as single parents, wading through all of life's noise.

Brigitte became determined to help change Aaron's diet after a glance at his fridge. "I would come over and would be like, 'What do you eat? There's nothing in your refrigerator but water and soda,'" Brigitte says. So while cooking for her kids, she began making extra portions for Aaron, bringing over chili, pasta, meatloaf and salad. He started losing weight, and she kept feeding him.

At five months, they officially became a couple. At seven months, they moved in together, and a year in, they were engaged, with the weight coming off of Aaron just as quickly—100 pounds in the first year. Brigitte began to slowly ease him off the painkillers, using massage as alternative therapy. To tone his new physique, Aaron needed to find exercises his battered ex-athlete body could handle. Walking and running were out because of his bad knees, and strength training would not work with two bad shoulders. So he started doing crunches, 1,500 a day in sets of 300.

"I went hard," Gibson says. "I was not going to stop."

“If you love someone,” Brigitte says, “you feed them vegetables.”
“If you love someone,” Brigitte says, “you feed them vegetables.”(Joon Lee for B/R Mag)
The next 90 pounds came off gradually over the next two-and-a-half years, dropping Aaron to 290 pounds, a weight he hadn't reached since his sophomore year of high school. He went from a 54-inch waist to a 40, and his blood sugar fell to normal levels, around 90 to 100. He no longer needed the diabetes medication he never used anyway. Then the abs started showing.

"It's kind of a funny feeling. You do all of this work, eating all the food, and preparing and doing all of that and it's worth it," Gibson says. "You see the numbers going off on the scale, which is awesome. It's like, what do I get out of it? Then you get a nice stomach. When you're out and about and you take off your shirt, it's a look-at-me type thing. It really is."

It was never a concerted effort to slim down. Brigitte just wanted Aaron to be healthier, and for a while, she didn't even notice the weight loss, being around him every day. "If you love someone," Brigitte says, "you feed them vegetables." Everything she'd done didn't hit her until one day when she hugged her husband, and for the first time, two years into the relationship, she could hold her own hands.

Every once in awhile, Aaron Gibson's brain tricks him into thinking his fifth toe is still attached, with some soreness or an itch, but when he looks down, he only sees four. Gibson is re-learning how to walk since losing his toe, which has caused a balance issue. Doctors previously told him he had the body of a 70-year-old arthritic man, and even before the amputation, Gibson sometimes used a cane to get around the house on days when his knees hurt too much. With every step, the bones in his knees grate together, the sound of gravel grinding under tires reverberating in his head.

He walks up and down the stairs slowly and deliberately, with hands on both railings. On a hook next to his bed hangs a claw he uses to pick things up from the ground. Bending over hurts too much. "Laying in bed bothers him," Brigitte says. "I think it's because his dad just laid there and got fatter." Before sleep, Brigitte often catches Aaron checking his stomach for fat, worried that his stomach will flop over onto the bed, like his dad's before him. Later into the night, Gibson sometimes wakes up from the pain, screaming.

"You feel very powerless," Brigitte says. "You feel, I want to help you, but I know there's nothing I can do, so you just go through it."

The painkillers still call to him. He hurts so much that one doctor suggested surgically inserting a spine-vibrating device that could distract him from the pain. "I've joked that I'm gonna have a power chair, that I'm gonna have to be in a wheelchair, but I joke about it because I'm serious," Aaron says. "There's gonna be a point where I can't walk anymore."

“I didn't ever want to be hungry because ‘tomorrow,’ as a kid, I could not eat,” Gibson says to B/R Mag.
“I didn't ever want to be hungry because ‘tomorrow,’ as a kid, I could not eat,” Gibson says to B/R Mag.(Joon Lee for B/R Mag)
One day, the physical pain, unlike its emotional cousin, will defeat Aaron Gibson, likely on a day too soon. The toe, once destined to be lost to diabetes or gout, was taken anyway.

The Gibsons plan their life around comfort to minimize Aaron's physical pain. They're scouting land to build a one-floor house so Aaron doesn't have to limp up and down the stairs anymore. Aaron's pain flames up in the days before a rainstorm, so the family never plans events when inclement weather is in the forecast.

On those days he stays at home, where he's often trapped by the pain. In Aaron's man cave—a room decorated with two framed photos of his time with the Lions, a picture of the 1999 Wisconsin Rose Bowl trophy, a 70-inch flat screen adorned with "BIG GIBS" on the wall above and littered with Badgers memorabilia—sit two reclining chairs. Brigitte and Aaron took an entire day to find those chairs, sitting in nearly 300 recliners at the store because they needed their picks to be just right. "They're really comfortable, aren't they?" Aaron asks.

He sits in the chairs a lot. Sometimes he watches NFL Network, studying the techniques of offensive linemen before and after his time. He's happier now than he was at any point during his football career, but he wouldn't give any of it back, either. The years of suffering brought him and his wife together. They set him and his new family up financially for the rest of their lives.

"I knew what could happen," he says, sitting in a room that's a shrine—from the large, framed NFL photos to the recliners—to what he was, and what he's become.

Joon Lee is a staff writer for Bleacher Report and B/R Mag. Follow him on Twitter: @iamjoonlee

Click here to get B/R Mag on the go in the new B/R app for more sports storytelling worth your time, wherever you are.
COMMENTS
RELATED

Report: Zeke Expected to Be Suspended

Trubisky Makes Case for Starting Job in Debut Loss

Rookie Fournette Says NFL Is 'Slow'

Kizer's Late TD and 2nd Half Revive Browns' QB Debate
AboutAdvertiseBlogContact UsCareersCommunity GuidelinesPressPrivacyTerms Of UseTicketsAdChoices
Copyright © 2017 Bleacher Report, Inc. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. BleacherReport.com is part of Bleacher Report – Turner Sports Network, part of the Turner Sports and Entertainment Network. Certain photos copyright © 2017 Getty Images. Any commercial use or distribution without the express written consent of Getty Images is strictly prohibited. AdChoices
SKIP TO CONTENT
The Atlantic
Popular
Latest
Sections
Politics & Policy
Culture
Business
Science
Technology
Health
Education
U.S.
Global
News
Notes
Photo
Video
Events
Writers
Projects
Magazine
Current issue
All issues
Manage subscription
Subscribe
More
Create account
Sign in
Newsletters
Audio
Life Timeline
Events
Books
Shop
View all
Subscribe
SUBMITSearch The Atlantic
Search The Atlantic...
QUICK LINKS
James Fallows
Ta Nehisi Coates
Manage subscription
Giving "The Devil" His Due
For several years in the early 1990s U.S. intelligence maintained close ties with a Hatian named Emmanuel "Toto" Constant, the founder of a savage paramilitary group that has been held responsible for a prolonged wave of killings and other atrocities. Toto Constant today walks the streets of Queens, a free man. How did he come to find refuge in the United States? Who has been holding up his deportation?

DAVID GRANN  JUNE 2001 ISSUE   GLOBAL
Share  Tweet   …
LinkedIn
Email
Print
TEXT SIZE

Listen and subscribe to The Atlantic’s podcast, Radio Atlantic. This week: Kurt Andersen on How America Lost Its Mind. Click here for more.
N o one remembers who first saw him in the neighborhood, but one day last summer Emile Maceus was nearly certain that Emmanuel "Toto" Constant—the man everyone called "the devil"—was standing on his front stoop. The man was six-foot-three, maybe more; he wore a coat and tie, and his hair—a tightly curled Afro—was neatly combed. He had come, he said, to show a client Maceus's house, a three-bedroom in Queen's Village, New York. He was a real-estate agent, he said, and had seen the pink for sale sign on the front lawn.

Maceus stared at him. The man's face was pudgier than Maceus remembered from Haiti, during the military regime of the early 1990s. Back then he had been bone-thin and ghostlike, sometimes appearing with an Uzi or with a .357 Magnum tucked under his shirt. To help keep the junta in control he had terrorized the population with his paramilitary squad— a legendary outfit of armed civilians who, together with the Haitian military, allegedly tortured, raped, and murdered thousands of people. "Can we look around?" the man asked.

Maceus wasn't sure what to do. Maybe it wasn't Constant. He was bigger than Maceus recalled, more genial, and before Maceus knew it, the man was walking through his house, poking his head into each room, looking at the floorboards and the toilets, taking note of the overhead space in the kitchen, and commenting in Creole. In the living room the man passed a poster on the wall of Jean-Bertrand Aristide—the once and future Haitian president, and the paramilitaries' archenemy—but didn't give it a second look. Maybe he was just a real-estate agent after all, just another Haitian immigrant trying to survive in New York.

But as the real-estate agent was leaving, Maceus kept thinking, What if he is Toto Constant? Maceus knew that in 1994, after the United States overthrew the military regime, Constant, a fugitive from Haitian justice, had been allowed, inexplicably, to slip into the country. Maceus had heard that after Constant had finally been arrested and ordered deported, he had in 1996 mysteriously been released under a secret agreement with the U.S. government—even though the Haitian government had formally requested his extradition and U.S. authorities had found photos of his group's victims, their bodies mutilated, pasted to the walls of his Port-au-Prince headquarters like trophies. As the man was opening the front door, Maceus's curiosity overcame him. He asked in Creole, "What's your family name?"

The man hesitated. "Constant."

It was Toto Constant. For an instant the two Haitians stood there, staring at each other. Then Constant and his client sped off in a car. Maceus went inside and found his wife. She was trembling. "How could you bring that devil in my house?" she shouted. "How could you?"

News of the encounter spread through the city's sprawling Haitian community, from Flatbush to Laurelton to Cambria Heights to Brooklyn, as it would have in Haiti—by teledjòl, word of mouth. Constant had ventured out into the community several times since the U.S. government had set him free, but never with such audacity—selling houses to the same people he had driven into exile. When he first arrived in Queens, he seemed to emerge only periodically. He was spotted, someone said, at a disco, clad in black, dancing on the day of Baron Samedi, the voodoo lord of death who guards cemetery gates in his top hat and tails. He was seen at a butcher shop and at a Blockbuster. Haitian-community radio and local newspapers reported the sightings—"haiti's grim reaper partying in u.s.," announced one headline—but he always managed to vanish before anyone could locate him. Finally, in 1997, the rumors led to a quiet street in Laurelton, Queens, near the heart of the Haitian community, where for years exiles had hoped to shed the weight of their history—a history of never-ending coups and countercoups—and where Constant could be seen sitting on the porch of the white-stucco house he shared with his aunt and mother. "The whole idea of Toto Constant living free in New York, the bastion of the Haitian diaspora, is an insult to all the Haitian people," Ricot Dupuy, the manager of Radio Soleil d'Haiti, in Flatbush, told his listeners after Constant moved in.

It was not long before residents draped the street's trees and lampposts with pictures of Constant's alleged victims, their hands and feet bound with white cord or their limbs severed by machetes. Neighbors shoved one of the most horrifying pictures—a photo of a young boy lying in a pool of blood—under Constant's door. But a few days later Constant was back on his porch. Locals came by and spat at his bushes; they stoned his door. Then, last summer, after Constant's appearance at the Maceus house, an angry crowd appeared around his home, yelling "Murderer!" and "Assassin!" At one point, as they were gathering, someone spotted a figure down the road—a well-known ally of Constant's, "a spy," as one person cried out—and the crowd chased after him. When he disappeared and there was still no sight of Constant, the crowd marched to the real-estate office, four miles away, where it threatened to drive the Haitian owner out of business unless he fired his new employee.

By last November, Haitians had created permanent Toto Watches—networks that tracked Constant's every whereabouts. At about this time I met Ray Laforest, one of the Toto Watchers, and he agreed to show me where "the devil" could be found. He told me to meet him at Binnette's Hair Palace, on Linden Boulevard, next to the real-estate office in front of which Constant had been seen smoking on his lunch break, and we would look for him.

The barbershop was in the center of Cambria Heights, across the street from a Haitian restaurant and next to a Haitian grocer. It was a small, cramped space, with a TV in the corner. Customers sat in old chrome seats with their heads tilted back, while barbers in white smocks trimmed their hair. As I waited for Laforest, one of the barbers, a young man with a gold chain around his neck, looked at me suspiciously. I explained that I was doing a story on Toto Constant. He said that Constant was a "vampire," someone who sucked the life out of people.

An older barber, who had been working at his chair on the opposite side of the room, walked over to a closet and pulled out a shovel. It was long, with a thick metal handle, and in a bit of showmanship he lifted it in the air like a club. "This is what they do to the devil people" like Toto, he said, banging it against the floor.

A few minutes later Laforest walked in. He was a large man, with a beard and sunglasses. He carried with him several Wanted posters of Constant, one of which he unfurled, revealing an old black-and-white photograph of the reputed death-squad leader. A moustache curled down around the corners of his mouth, and several crooked teeth showed between his lips. In bold letters the poster said wanted: emmanuel "toto" constant for crimes against the haitian people.

As we walked outside, Laforest told me that Constant had disappeared since the protest. "He's gone into hiding again," he said. We got in his car and drove through the neighborhood, past a series of elegant Tudor houses, until we arrived at the house where Constant had last been seen. "Why are you stopping?" I asked.

"I'm numb," he said. "If I saw him right now, I'd tie him up myself." He told me that Constant's men and other paramilitaries had dragged one of his friends from a church and shot him in broad daylight, and that earlier his own brother had been tortured by the Haitian military. We waited for several minutes, parked behind a bush. "Bay kou bliye, pote mak sonje," Laforest said.

"What does that mean?" I asked.

"It's an old Creole proverb," he said. "Those who give the blows forget, those who bear the scars remember."

Letting Toto Speak for Toto
I had been looking for Constant ever since I heard that a man facing charges in Haiti for crimes against humanity was living among the very people against whom the crimes were said to have been committed. Unlike Cain, who was cast out of his community, Constant had become an exile in a community of exiles, banished among those whom he had banished. Though he had fled justice, he could not fully escape his past. He had to face it nearly every day—in a glance from a neighbor, or a poster on the street.

More important, he was now, for the first time, confronted with the prospect of real justice. Last fall the Haitian government put him on trial in absentia for the murder of at least six people in the town of Raboteau in April of 1994. Dozens of others were also on trial. It was a historic case—the first major attempt by the Haitian government to prosecute Haitians (or anyone else) for the brutal crimes committed by the military regime and to test its judicial system, which had been corrupt for so long that it was essentially nonexistent. As a result there was growing pressure on the U.S. government, from home and abroad, to extradite him, and Constant, once intoxicated by press attention, gave fewer and fewer interviews. Since the protest outside his house he had apparently vanished.

When I reached his lawyer, J. D. Larosiliere, last October, he told me that things were at their most critical juncture. A barrel-chested Haitian-American who speaks a combination of formal English and street slang and has a penchant for finely tailored suits, Larosiliere told me he was often referred to as "the Haitian version of Johnnie Cochran." Denying that there had even been a massacre at Raboteau, he said that if Constant were sent back to Haiti, he would never receive a fair trial and would likely be assassinated. Because of the desperateness of the situation, Larosiliere agreed to let Constant talk to me at length about his current predicament and the allegations against him. "All we want to do is get his side of the story out," Larosiliere said.

So, one afternoon several days later I headed to Larosiliere's office, in Newark, New Jersey. When I arrived, Constant and Larosiliere were in a closed-door meeting, and I waited outside in the foyer. I could hear the sound of Creole punctured by occasional bursts of English. A moment later the door swung open, and a large man in a double-breasted suit hurried out. It took me a moment to recognize Constant—he looked at least thirty pounds heavier than in the pictures I'd seen of him taken during the military regime. He still had the same moustache, but on his heavier face it no longer looked so menacing. He wore a turtleneck under his jacket and, to my surprise, a gold earring in his left ear. "Hey, how you doing?" he said, speaking with only a slight accent.

I had expected many things, but not this: he looked like an average American. We sat down in a small conference room lined with books. He leaned forward and then back, and I took out my tape recorder and laid it on the table. Finally he said, "It's time for Toto to speak for Toto."

It was the first of more than a dozen interviews. As he told me his story over the next several months, he often spoke for hours on end. He turned over his voluminous notes and private papers, his correspondence and journals. During that time I also interviewed his alleged victims, along with human-rights workers, United Nations observers, Haitian authorities, former and current U.S. officials within the White House, the State Department, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, and the intelligence community, many of whom had never before spoken publicly about Constant. I also gained access to intelligence reports, some of which had previously been classified, and State Department cables. With these and other sources I was finally able to piece together not only the story of Emmanuel "Toto" Constant but also much of the story of how the United States government secretly aided him and later shielded him from justice.

Voodoo Paramilitary
I n October of 1993 the USS Harlan County, loaded with military personnel, was sent steaming toward Haiti's capital, Port-au-Prince. President Bill Clinton had dispatched the ship and its crew as the first major contingent of an international peacekeeping mission to restore to power Haiti's first democratically elected President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide. Aristide was a political priest, a wiry, passionate, bug-eyed orator who had risen to power in late 1990 on a mixture of socialism and liberation theology. The downtrodden of Haiti, which is nearly everyone, called him "Titid" and revered him; the military and the economic elite reviled him as an unstable radical. He was deposed in a coup less than a year after taking office and ultimately fled to the United States. Since then the military, along with roaming bands of paramilitaries, had murdered scores of people. The bloodshed had galvanized the international community, and the ship's arrival was hailed as a turning point in the effort to restore both some semblance of public safety and the island's democracy.

On October 11, as the Harlan County neared port, a group of UN and U.S. officials, headed by the charge´ d'affaires, Vicki Huddleston, and accompanied by a large press corps, came to formally welcome the ship and its troops. The assembly waited at the entrance to the port for a guard to open the gate, but nothing happened. Documentary footage shows Huddleston sitting in the back of her car with the CIA station chief. Speaking to another embassy official, she says into her walkie-talkie, "Tell the captain [of the port] I am here to speak with him."

"Roger, ma'am. We have passed that repeatedly to him, and we are getting nowhere."

"Well, tell him I'm here at the gate and I'm waiting for the authorities to open it."

"He doesn't want to talk right now ... He ran away."

"Open the gate."

"We're having some problem with hostile staff. We may have a situation."

Indeed, at that moment a band of armed men, under the direction of the then little-known thirty-six-year-old paramilitary leader Toto Constant, stormed the area. The men, who had already blocked the dock where the Harlan County was supposed to tie up, surrounded Huddleston's car, banging on the hood and yelling in English, "Kill whites! Kill whites!"

There were only about a hundred in all, many of them pot-bellied and out of shape; although some carried guns, many wielded sticks and pitchforks. But the show of force, just a few days after U.S. soldiers had been killed in Somalia, proved terrifying. Constant put on a savvy performance for the press cameras: his ragtag troops banged on sheepskin drums and shouted "Somalia" as if it were a battle cry. They drank and caroused through the night, turning their vehicles' lights toward the open sea where the Harlan County was still waiting. Finally President Clinton ordered the ship to leave. It was one of the most humiliating retreats in U.S. naval history, and a surprising one even to those who forced it. "My people kept wanting to run away," Constant told reporters afterward. "But I took the gamble and urged them to stay. Then the Americans pulled out! We were astonished."

That day was the coming-out party for Constant and his Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti, better known as FRAPH, which in Creole evokes the word "frapper," meaning "to hit." (Constant said the name had come to him in a dream.) Organized by Constant several months earlier, FRAPH was described by its leader as a grassroots political organization—"a mysterious event"—that would rise from the masses and replace the remnants of Aristide's populist movement. The party literature, which Constant composed on an old manual typewriter and handed out to the press, explained that "FRAPH is a popular movement of unity, where all the social sectors are firmly intertwined to bring perfect harmony to the Haitian people."

But FRAPH was a peculiar sort of political party: although it offered free food and liquor to lure supporters, most of its thousands of followers were drawn from the armed bands that operated at the military's behest and from former members of the now defunct Tonton Macoutes, the infamous paramilitary organization named for a child-snatching bogeyman in Haitian fairy tales. At rallies FRAPH members demonstrated mass salutes that seemed designed to evoke fear: at Constant's cue his followers would raise their left hands over their heads and slam their right fists into them, or raise their right hands in the air, palms forward, in Nazi fashion. And although FRAPH's literature spoke of unity, Constant declared publicly, "If Aristide were to return, he would die. Aristide and his supporters are the enemies of this country."

In this setting Constant tried to cultivate an image as the only gentleman in a band of thugs. At the official launching of FRAPH, as his men surrounded him with guns, he released a handful of doves. Rather than don a soft hat and sunglasses, or camouflage pants, like other paramilitaries, he often appeared in a neat blue suit and tie. He sometimes carried a bamboo cane in his right hand, which he leaned on as he walked. He was well suited for the part of the gentleman. He had been raised within Haiti's tiny aristocracy, and had studied at Canadian universities and worked briefly in New York as a Haitian diplomat. He spoke English with only a slight accent, and translated for the press in Spanish, French, and, of course, Creole. "Never forget that I am from the establishment," he liked to say. "I am not just any Joe out there. I'm Constant."

Still, there was something frightening about him. His eyes, set deep in his head, were glassy and jittery. U.S. officials and reporters said that he was wired on cocaine (Constant has always denied this), and he was known to stay up all night, driving wildly through the streets, his bodyguards hanging out the back of the car with their machine guns. In public he usually appeared with a man named Jojo, a fierce former Macoute who claimed that his pregnant wife had been murdered by Aristide's supporters and who was regarded as a merciless killer. "He is not afraid of anything," Constant still says of Jojo respectfully.

Throughout the summer and fall of 1993, with Jojo as his partner, Constant began a campaign to set up FRAPH offices in every town and village. Members received special ID cards and, apparently with the military's approval, machine guns. Like the old Macoutes, they operated as part local bosses, part spies, part extortionists, part militia, and part political cadre. But at their core they were an extension of the military's might, a brutal "force multiplier," as one U.S. intelligence report put it, which would allow the regime the deniability that a prudent government always looks for in the use of murder. "FRAPH's will is an order," Constant declared shortly after the storming of the port. "When we ask for something, the entire country has to accept it."

"Facial Scalping"
M ore and more packs of armed men began to roam at night, looking for Aristide supporters. They were believed to be FRAPH, the police, or the military, or a combination of all three, but they were usually careful to disguise themselves with hoods or women's clothing (a trademark of the old Macoutes). They carried tire irons, M-16s, Uzis, pistols, machetes, axes, and "voodoo powders," which were widely believed to be lethal. They broke into homes and seized their political enemies. "I realized that I was among animals," an Aristide supporter who was taken prisoner by one of these armed packs told human-rights monitors. "At first they played with me, taking out their guns and saying I would die. Then they took me to a little torture chamber where there was a small bed ... They started beating me about the buttocks with their truncheons, one after the other. At that moment I thought I would die. I passed out. When I came to, I was in a cell with another man. There were rivers of blood on the floor. Some of it was mine."

"The scenario is always substantially the same," the OAS/UN International Civilian Mission reported in 1994, after an extensive investigation. "Armed men, often military or FRAPH members, burst into the house of a political activist they [sought] to capture." If he wasn't there, the report said, the intruders attacked his wife or sister or daughter. "One guy took me by the hands and led me to the front porch," a woman told Human Rights Watch. "He said lie down. He said, 'If you don't I'll split your head open' ... He pulled his pants down to his knees, lifted up my nightgown, pulled down my underpants, and raped me."

Faceless bodies began to appear in the streets. The assailants had developed a kind of art known as "facial scalping," a bloody ritual in which a person's face was peeled from ear to ear with a machete. It was a way to torture people even in the afterlife, because, many believed, such mutilation would prevent a proper burial—trapping the spirit eternally in purgatory.

As the bodies piled up, Constant held forth. He would often sit in a rattan chair in the courtyard of the house that had been his father's, a sprawling Art Deco mansion with a swimming pool and fountains, and speak to the press. Unlike other paramilitary leaders, who purposely remained in the shadows, Constant craved coverage. He let reporters sleep in his garden. He cut back the hedges to make more space for them and handed out T-shirts emblazoned with FRAPH's name. "I had one-on-ones with the greatest reporters in the world," he recalls today. "All of them. I've met all of them. At one point I was the most interviewed person in the world. I was one of the most important. I had Japanese journalists at my place. It was incredible." Constant enjoyed playing the role of statesman. He warned the United States not to intervene and threatened to shut down the country in protest of the world embargo put into place after the coup. He called for the dissolution of Haiti's parliament, echoing Jojo, who had earlier warned that if it didn't disband, FRAPH would call on the people to "tie up the deputies." "What I say comes from my heart," Constant would say. Or "A leader has to know how to play with the army, the power, and the people."

As he cultivated the press, Constant also courted Haiti's houngans, or voodoo priests, a potent psychological force. He portrayed himself as an embodiment of the most ferocious spirits. He held public ceremonies in front of the markets or at temples, where his men laid out small skulls. At a typical ceremony he would lie on the ground, surrounded by skulls and fire. Then, as he rose from the flames, the crowd would chant in Creole, "Toto for President! Without Toto, Haiti can't have a life." Though he still carried a .357 Magnum, he insisted that he no longer needed it. "I have the power of voodoo with me," he said.

General Constant's Boy
I n Haiti nearly every leader has a hidden history, a family closet usually filled with the bones of enemies. Constant inherited the secrets, and to some degree the power, of his father. Gerard Emmanuel Constant had been the army chief of staff under Haiti's dictator François "Papa Doc" Duvalier during the 1960s, a loyal soldier who once famously rose from his bed in the middle of the night to execute, along with other officers, more than a dozen of his friends at the dictator's command. He remained a symbol of the old ruling order after it had collapsed.

But shortly after the military coup, in September of 1991, as his disciples emerged from the barracks to restore the old Duvalier system, the seventy-two-year-old general slipped into a coma and died. All the military leaders and former Duvalier supporters turned out for the old general's funeral. "It was a real phenomenon," Constant says. "I was inheriting all my father's protection and power and people. It was a symbolic transference." In his private papers Constant went even further: "My prominence, some might argue, is destiny ... To be the first son of General Gerard Emmanuel Constant is the call to arms for Emmanuel Gerard Constant, myself."

It was not long before people feared the younger Constant even more than they had feared his father. By the middle of 1994 thousands of Haitians had been slaughtered or had disappeared, and although no one knew for sure how many had been killed by FRAPH itself (most human-rights observers had by then been driven out of the country), the group was universally considered the most brutal of all the right-wing paramilitary outfits. Witnesses, many of them found floating on rafts as they tried to escape to the United States, told international authorities that Constant's men, in an effort to wipe out opposition, were annihilating the population. Even FRAPH members started to flee in disgust. "When they kill and rape people, we [new members] are forced to sit and watch," a former recruit told U.S. authorities, according to a declassified document obtained by the Center for Constitutional Rights for use in a lawsuit against FRAPH. Later, as part of their initiation, this same man said, the recruits were made to join the assaults.

Though Constant continued to deny the allegations, the UN concluded by 1994 that Constant's organization was "the only political movement [in Haiti] whose members have been linked to assassinations and rapes." In the spring of 1994 a secret cable from the office of the American military attaché in Port-au-Prince warned, "All over the country, FRAPH is evolving into a sort of Mafia." Its members were "gun-carrying crazies," one cable stated, eager to "use violence against all who oppose it."

According to witnesses, when a FRAPH member turned up dead in Cité Soleil, a sprawling slum in Port-au-Prince, in December of 1993, Constant's men descended within hours. Carrying machine guns and machetes, they torched a thousand houses in revenge, killing more than a dozen people. Here is an excerpt from the account by Human Rights Watch/Americas-NCHR:

They entered the neighborhood, looked for specific persons and shot them on sight, doused the precarious one-room shacks with gasoline, set them alight, and fired their weapons into the air as the flames spread ... During the fire, known FRAPH members beat and arrested several people under the eyes of the military ... The Justice and Peace Commission reported that firefighters were turned back by armed men ... [who] nailed doors shut, imprisoning people in their homes.
Constant, as usual, denied FRAPH's involvement. As he later pointed out, "If I was going to really react, there would be no more Cité."

Though there were reports that he was on the scene during the fire and at other times had participated personally in torture sessions, Constant was careful to avoid serious implication. But the more Constant appeared on television to deny any connection with crimes, the more he seemed the face of them. By the autumn of 1994 he was no longer merely the head of FRAPH; he had become, in the eyes of most Haitians, the embodiment of the regime: the voodoo lord of death, Baron Samedi, himself.

A Mysterious Escape
I n July of 1992 Brian Latell, the leading CIA analyst for Latin America, visited Haiti to gather intelligence as policymakers in Washington tried to assess military rule in Haiti. Afterward, in a report later obtained by the press, he wrote, "I do not wish to minimize the role the military plays in intimidating and occasionally terrorizing real and suspected opponents, but my experiences confirm the [intelligence] community's view that there is no systematic or frequent lethal violence aimed at civilians."

Playing down the bloodshed (Latell called the head of the junta, Lieutenant General Raoul Cedras, "a conscientious military leader"), the report directly conflicted with those coming from human-rights organizations, the press, and even the State Department. But along with subsequent CIA reports, it contributed to the ongoing vacillation in Washington. Whereas President Bill Clinton was pushing to restore the exiled Aristide to power, many in the CIA, along with elements in the Pentagon, feared that Aristide was a dangerous populist. In fact, Aristide was a problematic figure for the United States (he had once suggested necklacing his enemies with burning tires). But a crucial CIA report, which was circulated on Capitol Hill just after the Harlan County incident, seemed to grossly exaggerate his instability, claiming that he was so unbalanced psychologically that he had once had to be hospitalized. The charge later proved to be false, but at the time, it fueled American opposition to an invasion. "There were factions in the process who didn't want to get involved in Haiti and could use these intelligence reports to strengthen their position,"one former Clinton Administration official says.

But the evidence of "systematic" and "frequent lethal violence aimed at civilians" was overwhelming. And finally, in September of 1994, three years after the coup and almost a year after the Harlan County's retreat, President Clinton ordered a full-scale invasion to end what he called the "reign of terror." "We now know that there have been ... over three thousand political murders," he said. In preparation for battle Constant changed FRAPH's name to the Armed Revolutionary Front of the Haitian People and, according to news accounts, stockpiled weapons and "secret" powders that, he declared, would be able to "contaminate water so that the GIs will die." He claimed to have one powder ground from the bones of aids victims. Appearing in camouflage pants and a black T-shirt, a machine gun at his side, he no longer gave any hint of the diplomat. "Each FRAPH man," Constant said, "must put down one American soldier."

But faced with the might of the United States, the junta agreed to step down. Incredibly, after thousands of U.S. soldiers seized the island, many of them countenanced FRAPH's activities as expedient for maintaining order. When asked why, U.S. soldiers said they had been told by their superior officers that FRAPH was a legitimate opposition party, like Republicans and Democrats. U.S. soldiers even stood by, insisting they were not a local police force, while FRAPH members beat back civilians who had spilled onto the streets expecting liberation. It was only after random bands of FRAPH members mowed down a crowd of Haitians and shot and wounded an American photographer, and a radio conversation was intercepted in which Constant and his men threatened to "break out weapons" and "begin an all-out war against the foreigners," that U.S. forces finally reversed their stance. On October 3 they stormed FRAPH headquarters. A jubilant crowd gathered outside, cheering them on. Inside, amid piles of nail-embedded sticks, Molotov cocktails, trophy photos of mutilated corpses, and thousands of secret documents, soldiers surrounded more than two dozen FRAPH members. They bound their hands and gagged them, while the crowd screamed, "Let them die! Let them die!" As the soldiers departed with their FRAPH prisoners, the crowd rushed inside, smashing the headquarters.

Back at his father's mansion, Constant listened to a police scanner, waiting for the soldiers to seize him. His wife and children had already fled. At one point, while he was holed up, according to the Chicago Tribune, he yelled at a journalist, "Everybody who is reporting the situation bad ... by the grace of God, they will wind up in the ground!" But even as other FRAPH members were taken into custody, Constant remained free.

Not only was Constant not arrested but, to everyone's amazement, the U.S. embassy spokesman, Stanley Schrager, whose assassination Constant had called for only two days before, arranged a press conference for him outside the presidential palace. News footage shows Constant standing under the glaring sun, sweating in a jacket and tie. "The only solution for Haiti now is the reality of the return of Aristide," he said. "Put down your stones, put down your tires, no more violence." As he spoke, hundreds of angry Haitians pushed against a barricade of U.S. soldiers, screaming, "Assassin!" "Dog!" "Murderer!"

"If I find myself in disagreement with President Aristide," Constant pressed on, his voice now cracking, "I pledge to work as a member of loyal opposition within the framework of a legal democracy."

"Handcuff him!" people yelled from the crowd. "Tie him up! Cut his balls off!"

As the barricade of troops gave way, U.S. soldiers rushed Constant into a car, while hundreds of jeering Haitians chased after it, spitting and beating on the windows.

U.S. authorities insisted to reporters at the time that the speech was meant to foster "reconciliation," but one senior official told me later that it had been a disaster: "Here we were protecting him from the Haitians when we were supposed to be protecting the Haitians from him."

Throughout the occupation, ensconced in his house, where, he says, U.S. soldiers routinely came by to check on his safety, Constant tried to reinvent his past. "We're the ones who kept this country secure for a year," he told reporters, according to published accounts. "Nobody talks about that ... Aristide needs an opposition, and ... I am the only organization right now that ... can allow us to say there is a democracy." But the incoming government took a different view—and within a few months Constant was ordered to appear before a magistrate investigating charges against him of torture and attempted murder. On the day of the hearing people claiming to be FRAPH's victims waited for Constant outside the courtroom. He never appeared. He told me later that on Christmas Eve of 1994, with a small suitcase and what money he could stuff in his pockets, he had crossed the border on foot into the Dominican Republic, made his way to the airport, and then, using a valid visitor's visa he had obtained before the coup, caught a plane to Puerto Rico. From there he flew to the mainland United States without incident, ending up days later on the streets of New York City.

He was spotted by Haitians at nightclubs and galleries, and at one point managed to get out a radio broadcast to his followers back home. "As for you FRAPH members,"he said, according to a transcript of his statement, "close ranks, remain mobilized ... FRAPH people, where are you? FRAPH is you. FRAPH is me."Finally, after the Haitian government demanded that the United States do something, Secretary of State Warren Christopher wrote in a March, 1995, letter to Attorney General Janet Reno, "Nothing short of Mr. Constant's removal from the United States can protect our foreign policy interests in Haiti."

Two months later, saying that Constant had been allowed to enter the country owing to a bureaucratic error, INS officials surrounded him in Queens as he went to buy a pack of cigarettes. They forced him to the ground and frisked him. He was taken to Wicomico County Detention Center, on the Eastern Shore of Maryland. In September a judge ordered his deportation to Haiti. As he waited for the outcome of his appeal, he wrote letters to world leaders, including Nelson Mandela.

Dear Mr. President: It is hoped that this letter finds you in the best of health ... I could not hope to fill one of your footprints, yet here am I writing to one of the few men in all the world that could understand my situation, being in a white man's jail.
He grew a beard. He read Malcolm X and Che Guevara. "I am ... a political prisoner," he wrote in a letter to Warren Christopher. At one point he was put on a suicide watch. He wrote poetry.

If my friends could see me now What would they say? They would ask themselves what the hell Am I doing in a place like this ... They would ask themselves why I am so down and why I cry at night They would want to know if I've done something wrong. And they would stay away without helping a bit. If my friends could see me now they would be so glad not to be with me. And would forget what I've done for them in the past. But one day I'll be out of jail and I'll be out there kicking too. I'll be out there stronger and wiser and I will reach my goals... That day with a smile on my lips I will ask myself: But if my friends could see me now And quickly I will answer. They wish they were my friends.
Then, in December of 1995, as the INS inched closer to deporting him, Constant decided to play the only card he had left. He threatened to divulge details of U.S. covert operations in Haiti which he said he had learned about while secretly working for the Central Intelligence Agency.

The Perfect Recruit
T he story Constant tells begins around Christmastime, 1991. It was shortly after the coup, and he was working at Haiti's military headquarters when Colonel Pat Collins, the U.S. military attaché at the embassy, phoned and asked him to lunch. "Let's meet at the Holiday Inn," Collins said.

From the archives:

"Can't Anybody Here Play This Game?" (February 1998)
The Central Intelligence Agency is just no good at what it's supposed to be doing. So writes the author, a former CIA officer, who describes a corrosive culture in which promotion-hungry operatives collect pointless intelligence from worthless foreign agents. By Edward G. Shirley

"Inside the Department of Dirty Tricks" (August 1979)
"The business of intelligence has its ugly side." By Thomas Powers

From Atlantic Unbound:

Interviews: "The Numbers Game" (February 1997)
"During the Vietnam War ... a young CIA analyst ... single-handedly discovered massive fraud and political maneuvering on the part of the CIA, the military, and the White House."
Collins, who, a government spokesman confirmed, was working for the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency at the time, could not be reached for comment. But an associate says he was known to show up often at Haitian military headquarters. Constant says Collins was there on the night of the coup. Lynn Garrison, a Canadian who served as a strategist and adviser to the junta, told me that Collins was there in the days that followed, conferring with the new regime.

That day at the Holiday Inn, Constant says, he and Collins sat by a window overlooking the pool. Many people, Collins said, were impressed by Constant's background and suggested that Constant might play an important role in the power vacuum left by Aristide's ouster.

Constant was a tempting choice for recruitment by U.S. intelligence. He spoke impeccable English, knew his way around the military, and, as one of the new regime's top advisers, occupied an office right next to that of the junta's head, General Cedras. Since the coup Constant had taught a course on the dangers of Aristide's liberation theology at the training site for the National Intelligence Service (SIN). The service, according to The New York Times, had been created, funded, trained, and equipped by the CIA, starting in 1986, to combat drug trafficking, but it had quickly become an instrument of terror (and even, according to some U.S. officials, a source of drugs).

Constant says that Collins told him in this first meeting that he wanted him to meet someone else at Collins's home. "I'm not going alone," Constant remembers saying, only half joking. "I'm going to come with a witness." He says that he and an associate drove that night to Collins's residence. Although the streets were pitch-black, owing to a fuel shortage, Collins's house was completely lit up. Constant says they went upstairs, into a small antechamber next to the master bedroom, where a man with dark hair was waiting. He had on a short-sleeved shirt, and Constant noted his muscles. "I'm Donald Terry," the man said.

Constant says that as they sat drinking cocktails, Terry began to pepper him with questions about the stability of the current military regime, and pulled out a booklet—"a roster"—containing the names and backgrounds of officers in the Haitian armed forces. He and Collins asked Constant who were the most effective.

A few days later, Constant says, Terry asked to meet again, this time alone at the Kinam Hotel. "Why don't you join the team?" Terry asked.

"What's the team?"

"A group of people working for the benefit of Haiti." It was then, Constant says, that Terry divulged that he was an agent of the CIA. The U.S. government will not comment on any questions regarding Donald Terry; Terry himself could not be reached.

But the CIA had been deeply involved with the Haitian military and Haitian politics for decades. Constant remembers that his father served as an informal adviser to an agent who used to stop by for conferences on their porch in the 1960s. According to press reports, the Agency, after starting SIN, had planned to finance various political candidates in the 1987 presidential elections. The Senate Intelligence Committee vetoed the plan.

Constant says he eventually agreed to serve as a conduit between the Haitian military regime and U.S. intelligence. He says he was then given the code name Gamal, after Egypt's former nationalist leader, Gamal Abdel Nasser, whom he admired, and a two-way radio, with which he checked in regularly.

It is impossible to confirm all the details in Constant's account. For the record, a CIA spokesman stated that it was "not our policy" to confirm or deny relationships with any individuals; he would not discuss Constant. But there is little doubt that Constant was a paid informant. After Allan Nairn first reported Constant's connection to the intelligence community, in The Nation in October of 1994, several officials acknowledged it to reporters, and many have confirmed it to me recently. What has been a mystery is the nature of the relationship:just how big an asset was Constant? U.S. authorities have maintained that he was nothing more than a two-bit snitch. But interviews with several people connected to the intelligence community, together with Constant's own version of events, suggest that from the beginning he was a generous font of information, and later, according to at least some, a full-fledged operative. After the coup he helped to run a little-known operation called the Bureau of Information and Coordination, which collected various kinds of data: the number of deaths and arrests in Haiti, the number of adherents of liberation theology, and so forth. Constant says the data collection was for the purposes of economic development, but it clearly had another purpose: military intelligence.

According to Constant and to a non-Haitian connected to the intelligence community, Constant and another BIC member were the first to enter one of Aristide's private quarters, where they found a hoard of secret documents. Some of these ended up in the hands of U.S. intelligence officers, who in turn provided the documentation for controversial reports claiming that Aristide was mentally unbalanced, contributing to the voices against him in the United States.

A former senior CIA official justified using an informant who was as potentially problematic as Constant thus:"You can't help these bad guys accomplish stuff, but you got to give 'em money to find out what's happening in groups like that. And if you're going to recruit in a terrorist group like FRAPH, you're not going to get any functional equivalent ... [of] a Western democrat ... To find out what's going on, you rather rapidly end up in the same position as the FBI with the Mafia—recruiting and paying money and even granting freedom to lower-level folks, even some high-level folks."

Another former high-ranking government intelligence official put it more bluntly: "Look, we could have gone to the nuns [in Haiti] and asked them [to give us information]. But I'm sorry—the nuns are nice people, but what they know about terrorism is nothing." This same official observed that Constant was "one of a whole range of people we had relationships with, all with the knowledge of the Administration." He said he believed that Constant stood somewhere "on the spectrum of the relationship, from someone who talked to you occasionally to tell you things he wanted you to know to someone who was a wholly owned, salaried subsidiary, who provided information even to the detriment of his cause."

Constant says that by the time he officially created FRAPH, in 1993, he had been assigned another handler—John Kambourian, a strong, no-nonsense sort, who, Constant says, would drive with him through the mountains of Petionville, exchanging information. When I reached Kambourian by telephone and asked him about Constant, he told me to speak to public affairs at the State Department and hung up. It remains unclear how involved U.S. intelligence officers were, if they were involved at all, in the actual formation and evolution of FRAPH. A CIA spokesman, Mark Mansfield, stated for the record that the "CIA had no role in creating, funding, or guiding the FRAPH organization."But Lynn Garrison told me that when Constant was trying to start a secret police force, long before FRAPH, Collins told Garrison directly, "Let's let it play out and see where it takes us."One U.S. government official involved with Haiti during the military regime goes even further, saying he thinks it was common knowledge in intelligence circles that Collins was involved with FRAPH long before it became an official organization (by which time Collins had left the country). "If he didn't found FRAPH," this official told me, "he was at least very, very close to it." Trying to explain why the CIA or the Defense Intelligence Agency might form such an alliance, this official added, "People are always looking for counterbalance, and at that point Aristide was not in power. I'm not excusing it, but they didn't quite know what FRAPH was going to become."

Despite the existence at the time of internal State Department documents portraying the organization's members as thugs and assassins, Constant says that his handlers never asked him about FRAPH's alleged rapes and murders. What's more, Constant says, the CIA and the DIA encouraged him to help derail Aristide's return and even knew beforehand about his demonstrations against the Harlan County, which helped to delay the invasion for nearly a year. A CIA spokesman denied to me that the Agency pushed its own foreign-policy goals in Haiti, but Lawrence Pezzullo, the U.S. envoy to Haiti at the time, along with other U.S. officials, publicly accused the CIA of exaggerating the threat of the Harlan County, thereby derailing Aristide's return and, in essence, pursuing its own agenda. And Constant says, "If I'm guilty of all these things they say, then they are guilty of them too."

The Breakup
Toto Constant's relationship with U.S. intelligence, according to both Constant and several CIA officials, continued undisturbed until the spring of 1994. It was then, Constant says, that Kambourian called and said they had to meet. He told Constant to bring the radio. "I'm sorry," Constant remembers Kambourian's saying, "but we can't see you anymore."

"Why?" Constant asked.

Kambourian said that in the wake of the Harlan County incident and Constant's rhetoric against the President, Washington wanted to sever its ties.

U.S. officials say that intelligence ties to Constant were more or less cut at this point. Cooperation between FRAPH and the U.S. military was eventually curbed, and in October of 1994 American forces stormed FRAPH headquarters. Afraid for his life, Constant went to meet Lieutenant General Henry Shelton, who was in charge of the occupation. Constant recalls, "I told Shelton straight out, 'I'm a son of a general, and I inherited his honor and dignity, and that's why I'm here to ask what the rules of engagement are, because I don't understand them.'"

The answer he got seems to have been a blunt one. General Shelton, who is now the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, declined my requests for an interview, but his staff provided me with the transcript of an oral history, which Shelton recorded during the invasion and in which he vividly describes at least part of the encounter with Constant.

"I had no desire at all to meet with Constant ... as far as I was concerned, we had potentially disarmed and disabled his organization from top to bottom." But he said that Constant had been pushing for a meeting for weeks, and eventually he and Major General David Meade decided to see if they could get from him what they wanted: first, that he provide a complete list of FRAPH members and the location of their weapon caches; second, that he call each one of his key thugs and tell them to surrender their arms; and third, that he publicly accept Aristide's return and transform FRAPH into a peaceful political party.

"We were using a little bit of psychological warfare on Constant," Shelton, in his oral history, disclosed. "I sent Meade in first. Meade was to go in and tell [Constant] that he was getting ready to meet the big guy ... I gave Meade about twenty or thirty minutes to set the conditions, and then I arrived and my security guy, the seal, entered the room ... rattling the doors and kicking on doors to make sure the place was secure before I came in, as they always did. But Constant saw all this, and it was kind of like seeing a meeting with the Godfather being set up ... and so he got very nervous at that time, and his eyes got very big." It was then, Shelton said, that Meade walked out and he walked in. "[Constant] immediately stood up and smiled and stuck out his hand, at which time I just said to myself, 'Remember two things—force and death they understand.' So I looked at him and I said, 'Sit down!' and he immediately sat down, and the smile left his face ... and I said to him, 'I understand that you have agreed to all the conditions that we have set for you to keep us from hunting you down and members of your organization.' And he said, 'Oh, yes, yes, I have no problem with any of that.' And then he started, 'But Haiti is ...' and he started into his role about the history of Haiti and how important the FRAPH is. I let him get about ten seconds into that, and I cut him off and told him very curtly that I was not interested in hearing any of that right now."

The very next day Constant gave the speech accepting Aristide's return and casting himself as the new leader of the democratic opposition. According to a highly placed U.S. official, the speech was outlined by Constant's old CIA contact, Kambourian, and handed over to the U.S. embassy, which in turn dictated it to Constant, who apparently accepted it without his usual bravado. "He could have been imprisoned," the official told me, "but the judgment was made that as long as we could get out of him what we wanted, it would be okay for him to walk around."

General Shelton may have wanted little to do with Constant, but other elements of the U.S. government seem to have done more than just keep an eye on him. Immigration authorities told me it was "impossible to believe," as one put it, and "totally bogus," as another put it, that Constant could have entered the United States at that time on a valid visa without either help from someone in the U.S. government or forged documents. "Everyone knew he was a killer," says one former INS official. "His picture was everywhere." Constant told me that he didn't ask for any help in getting out, but that he did alert certain U.S. officials before he left, and "it's possible they did something." A high-ranking intelligence-community source, although not commenting directly on Constant's case, described the background mechanisms: "On the high end of the spectrum, the director of the CIA can bring in fifty to a hundred people in the top spy category. These are people to whom we owe a lot, because they have risked their lives doing things of great value to our nation, so it is [if] you want to get out, we will get you out; you want to get in, we will get you in, get you a house, whatever ... Lower down, you can do everything from a little help around the edges to supplying visas."

How Toto Got Sprung
S itting in Wicomico County Detention Center, on the verge of being deported with the full support of the State Department and the INS, Constant leveraged the potential exposure of his old connections to save himself. Threatening to divulge the details of his relationship with the CIA, he filed a $50 million lawsuit against Warren Christopher and Janet Reno for wrongful imprisonment. "CIA operatives collaborated with the Plaintiff," his lawyer maintained in the suit. To underscore his warning he appeared on 60 Minutes in December of 1995 in his prison jumpsuit. "I feel like that beautiful woman that everybody wants to go to bed with at night, but not during the daytime," he told Ed Bradley. "I want everybody to know that we are dating."

It was at this point that Benedict Ferro, who was the district director of the INS in Baltimore at the time of Constant's incarceration, began to see things that he had never seen before and that were, as he puts it now, "off the scale." Ferro had worked for the INS for more than thirty years, and he was used to working on cases that involved sensitive government issues. After Constant made his threats, Ferro says, highly placed officials throughout the government began to get involved, even though the Administration had already publicly and privately indicated that Constant would be returned.

A cover page from a May 24, 1996, Justice Department memorandum titled "Emmanuel Constant options" indicates that those consulted in the process included Samuel Berger, the deputy national-security adviser; Strobe Talbott, the deputy secretary of State; Jamie Gorelick, the deputy attorney general; and David Cohen, the deputy director of operations for the CIA. (The cover page was one of several released to the National Security Archive through the Freedom of Information Act; the memo itself was not released.) "Look, they came out of the woodwork when [Constant] started singing," says Ferro, who is now the president of INSGreencard.com.

By the time of the memo Constant had already been held in prison for just over a year, and there was confusion about how long the United States could detain him under what many legal experts consider to be an extremely murky part of immigration law.

It was then—"at the eleventh hour,"as Ferro recalls—that government officials received information regarding a plot to assassinate Constant when he was returned to Haiti. At least some at the INS maintained that, even if true, the report merely meant that Constant should remain in a U.S. prison until a later date. "We have Cubans from the Mariel boatlift who remain in jail," Ferro says. "We have people from the Middle East who are in jail who can't be sent back. This is not a new process." But according to several officials involved in the deliberations, the information swayed the senior decision-makers. "I didn't want to send someone, even a killer like Constant, to his summary execution," one person involved in the case told me. When I asked one senior official who it was that had uncovered the plot on Constant's life and prepared the classified report, he answered simply, "Reliable U.S. intelligence sources."

Ferro and several of his colleagues at the INS made one last attempt to press their views, insisting that they could not in good conscience send a suspected terrorist into a community where he might harm U.S. citizens or where, just as likely, U.S. citizens might harm him. But it didn't matter. The final decision was hammered out over several days, and senior officials from the Justice Department, the State Department, and the National Security Council participated. "To this day I can't understand why he's not rotting in a U.S. jail," Ferro says. "We were not reinventing the process. He was just treated differently than any other murderer or terrorist."

Ferro himself gave Constant the good news.

"They called me at the prison and said I could get my things and go," Constant says today, still surprised.

"I basically just read from the script," Ferro says. "This guy was believed to have murdered and assassinated all these people, and we released him into our society. It was outrageous."

A copy of the legal settlement that set the terms for Constant's release, which I obtained from Constant, reveals certain conditions: Constant must live in his mother's home in Queens and must remain within the confines of the borough except for visits to the INS office in Manhattan; he must check in with the Immigration and Naturalization Service every Tuesday; and he must not talk about, among other things, Haitian politics or the details of the legal agreement. "I like exposure," he says, "so this is the worst thing they can do to me, this gag order." (As may by now be apparent, Constant takes an expansive view of the restrictions.) Constant's formal legal status is this: he is under an outstanding order of deportation whose execution has been withheld on the advice of the State Department.

When I recently asked Warren Christopher about the deal with Constant, he said he could not recollect the details of what had happened and would try to call me back. Later his assistant called and said that he still didn't have "sufficient recollection of the matter that you discussed to comment, and unfortunately it would entail flying back East to look at his old paperwork, and unfortunately he is not able to do that at this time."

Constant's lawyer, J. D. Larosiliere, who has continued to cite the threat to his client's life and the protection to which Constant is thus entitled under the UN Convention Against Torture, says, "I knew that he wasn't going to be deported, but I needed a hook in the legal system to allow them to have a way out. Plausible deniability. That's all this game is about. Plausible deniability." Indeed, to many Haitians and human-rights workers the real motive for Constant's release was clear even without knowing precisely what had occurred behind closed doors: to shield the CIA's association with FRAPH, the U.S. government needed Constant's silence.

A "Tell All Autobiography"
"M y conscience is clear," Constant told me last October as I met with him in his lawyer's office. When I pressed him about FRAPH murders and rapes, he said that there was no evidence implicating him and that he could not be held accountable for every member of such a sprawling operation. "If somebody the day of the vote killed another individual in the street of New York, and they found he just voted Democrat, they're not going to make Clinton responsible," he said.

He leaned back in his chair, as if trying to think of his next point, and then, as if it had just dawned on him, he pulled out a piece of paper and began to scribble on it. Trying to illuminate the logic of the military regime, he drew a circle in the center and wrote the word "army" inside it. Then he drew two circles orbiting around the first—one marked "the people" and the other "FRAPH." "In Haiti our democratic instrument has always been the army since 1804," he said, pointing to the first circle. "When the people are fed up with the government, it is the army which represents that same populace that overthrows the government. The army is the extension of the people." He said all this without a hint of insincerity. Indeed, he seemed happy to be telling his side of the story, and at the conclusion of this first interview he invited me to his house in Queens, where he was living, as he put it, "like a hostage."

Part of a long row of nearly identical English Tudors in Laurelton, the house looked on the outside like a dump: the façade, once white, was weather-stained, the front steps needed paint, and the storm window overlooking the porch was shattered. Haitians had told me, among other things, that Constant kept the bones of his victims in his room, practiced late-night voodoo rituals, stored CIA arms in the basement, and shot trespassers. Some people were afraid to walk past the front yard, and one neighborhood kid told me that his friends dared one another to sneak up on the porch and look in the window at night, where they could see "the devil" sitting by himself.

As I hesitated on the stoop, the front door suddenly opened and Constant appeared, holding a cigarette. "Come on in," he said. I followed him into the living room, which was musty and dimly lit, the walls covered with Haitian art, the couches and chairs draped in plastic. Constant sat across from me in a rocker, swaying back and forth as he smoked. He handed me several piles of documents that, he said, established his innocence, including FRAPH speeches, cables between the U.S. embassy in Port-au-Prince and the State Department, and a letter Constant had written to President Clinton. "There's a lot more," he said, "but I've lost a lot of things since I came here."

As I started to ask him questions about his past, he took a tape recorder from his pocket and said that he was working on a book about his life. "I'm in the midst of writing," he said. "I went to take a class about self-publishing your book, and one of the things the guy told me was if you're talking about your past, then record yourself." I thought perhaps he just wanted to make sure I quoted him correctly, but a moment later he showed me a book proposal: "This proposal offers a 'hot' new 'tell all' expose on Emmanuel 'toto' Constant code name 'gamal,' and FRAPH ... The market analysis suggests that with at least 2 million Haitians in the U.S. and at least 50,000 others in the U.S. who have interest in Haiti ... this book could easily sell over 1 million copies." The proposal promised that the book, tentatively titled Echoes of Silence, would serve as a treatise on what Constant called the "poli-military organization." He had even drawn up a dummy book jacket that said,

Emmanuel "Toto" Constant, notorious leader of FRAPH ... and alleged murderer, rapist, and terrorist thug, breaks the yoke of silence. Speaking from his heart, he exposes the real man behind the villainous images. Interesting, provocative, informative and sensitive, Echoes of Silence candidly portrays the complexities of life in Haiti, where nothing is simple. It might lead one to conclude: The political frenzy in Haiti, as addictive and dangerous as any narcotic, keeps the masses alive mentally and emotionally even while it kills.
This was Constant's latest attempt to earn a living. Since his release from prison, as I would learn during our talks, he had tried all sorts of ways to set himself up. He had taken computer classes. He had sold used cars. But each time he had found an opportunity, the other Haitian immigrants in the community had risen up and driven him from his job. "I'm a prisoner," he said. And then, "The worst time is when they came in front of the real-estate office ... because I really had a good situation."

Since that day, last August, he had become what he called an "investment consultant," which mostly meant selling and renting properties as covertly as he could. Whenever I was with him, his cell phone rang. Usually he slipped into Creole, but occasionally he'd say things like "I can show you the place tomorrow. No problem. Heat included. Okay. Au revoir."

He told me he was concentrating on credit reports, because a lot of Haitians were unfamiliar with them. "I need to establish some kind of income here," he said.

Once I listened to him raise and lower his voice like an auctioneer: "Hello. Oui. Oui ... I saw the apartment ... They were asking one thousand, one hundred dollars, and I'll bring it down to a thousand ... Everything is included ... Okay? ... It's Cambria Heights, very nice neighborhood, very quiet, very, very safe ... I'm working very hard for you."

His wife called one day, from Canada, where she had gone with their four children out of fear for their safety. "My wife is leaving me," he said when he hung up, lighting another cigarette. "We're having discussions about the kids. I wanted them to come the way they used to, and she doesn't want them to. So we're having an argument, but everything will be okay."

After a while his phone rang again, and I asked if I could look around the place. "No problem," he said. I headed upstairs, past several cracked walls and closed doors. Constant's room was on the third floor. It was small and cluttered with videos and men's fashion magazines. By his bed was a framed picture of him from his appearance on 60 Minutes. In one corner was a small shrine. Candles and figurines of Catholic saints, which often play a role in voodoo, were arranged in a neat circle. As I bent down to inspect them, Constant called out my name. One of the statues was the patron saint of justice; on its base was inscribed, "Be ever mindful of this great favor and I will never cease to honor thee as my special and powerful patron." Constant called my name again, and I hurried downstairs. "Let's go out," he said, putting on a leather jacket.

The Haitian community in New York, as in Haiti, is segregated, largely according to class. The poorest Haitians are in Brooklyn, and those of greater wealth and status have fanned out into more-affluent settlements like Laurelton and Cambria Heights. As we walked through Laurelton, I could smell roasting griot, or pork. The sound of compas, Haitian dance music, blared from grocery stores. We passed several men smoking in the cold, chatting in Creole. "I need some meat," Constant said, heading toward a butcher shop. The store was packed, and we could barely fit inside. A small circle of Haitians were playing cards in the back. As Constant pressed up against the counter, I realized that everyone was staring at him. "I need some goat," he said, breaking the sudden silence. He pointed at some enormous hind legs hanging from a meat hook. He glanced at the back, where several people seemed to be saying something about him, but he appeared unfazed. The butcher began to cut through the bone and gristle of a goat leg. His thick arm pushed down, slicing in clean strokes. "Everybody here knows who I am," Constant said on the way out. "Everybody. They've all read about me or seen my picture." He darted across the street to a barbershop. A closed sign hung on the door, but he could see the barber inside, and Constant banged on the window, pleading with him to take one more customer. "There's another barbershop down the street," he told me, "but if I went there they'd slit my ..." His voice trailed off as he drew his fingers across his throat and let out a strange laugh.

A Courthouse in Haiti
T he trial was more than a thousand miles away from New York. On September 29 of last year a Haitian court began trying Constant on charges of murder, attempted murder, and being an accomplice to murder and torture—charging him, in effect, with the Raboteau massacre. I went there with J. D. Larosiliere in October, as the trial was reaching its climax. Twenty-two people—mostly soldiers and FRAPH paramilitaries—were being prosecuted in person. Constant and the leaders of the junta were being tried in absentia.

As the last U.S. troops prepared to pull out, the country was, as ever, a shambles. Although the Clinton Administration's policies had stemmed the bloodshed, success in "nationbuilding" was elusive. Eighty percent of the people were unemployed, and two thirds were malnourished. Gangs still roamed the streets. Drug-running planes took off and landed with impunity. Even the heralded new democratic system was believed to be rife with fraud. Aristide, after having put his protégé René Préval in power, was running for the presidency again amid allegations that he was trying to pack the parliament with his supporters. Political thuggery and assassination, this time from both the right and the left, were beginning to occur again. "Now everyone knows I was right," Constant told me later. "Everyone has seen what has happened under Aristide."

The trial itself was a potential flash point for violence. The U.S. embassy warned Americans to stay away from the area for fear of "large scale demonstrations, tire burnings, rock throwing and worse." As our plane landed, Larosiliere told me that he had been warned about potential assassination attempts. "If they attack me, it will only help me prove my case," he said. "If I'm not safe, then how can my client be safe?"

At the airport we met a large man with mirrored sunglasses and a military bearing, who would serve as Larosiliere's "attaché." "You cannot depend on the police to have security," the attaché told me. "So you need to be armed to protect yourself." The attaché pushed our way through a crowd of taxi drivers, bag handlers, beggars, and pickpockets. I smelled flesh and sweat and food, and as we rushed to the car, I tried to deflect the arms outstretched to help me with my things. "Welcome to Haiti," Larosiliere said.

The city of Gonaïves, where the courthouse was located, is only seventy miles from Port-au-Prince, but it took us half a day to get there. Nearly all the roads in Haiti are unpaved. The Americans started to build a paved road after the invasion, but they gave up and the road now ends abruptly on the edge of a slum. We rumbled past Aristide's new estate on the outskirts of the capital, where he increasingly secludes himself; past the old Club Med, abandoned since 1999, along with almost all the other tourist sites; past irrigated plains where peasants rolled up their pant legs to wade through fields of rice. Then we headed north, past arid, desolate land where nothing seemed to grow but cacti, until we came upon Gonaïves.

The courthouse was in the center of the city, surrounded by tractor-trailers—a makeshift barricade to prevent mobs from rushing in. We entered a small, squat building, where armed guards searched us for weapons; the attaché told me he had left his gun behind, but he stayed close to Larosiliere's side. We passed through one room and then another; finally, to my surprise, we headed into an open courtyard, where the trial was being held under a billowing white canopy. The judge sat at a table, wearing a black robe and a tall hat with a white band. He had a bell in place of a gavel. To one side of him, sitting in neat rows, were the prosecution and the jury; to the other side were the defense and the twenty-two accused, behind a cordon of armed guards. Larosiliere joined the defense, and the attaché and I sat at the end opposite the judge, with the scores of observers and alleged victims.

I had barely sat down when a lawyer for the prosecution began to scream at Larosiliere, jabbing his hand in the air and demanding that Larosiliere tell the court who he was and why he was there. The attaché, who had been at my side, was on his feet before Larosiliere answered. The crowd filled with murmurs: "Toto Constant! Toto Constant!" People looked around as if Constant might be under the canopy. The lawyer began to bark again at Larosiliere; the attaché now stood by Larosiliere's side, his arms crossed on his chest.

Most of the alleged victims had already testified that on April 22, 1994, soldiers and FRAPH members had descended on the village of Raboteau, known for its staunch support of Aristide. They described being driven from their homes, forced into open sewers, robbed, and tortured. In past attacks the villagers had fled to the sea, where their fishing boats were tied up. But when they did so this time, they said, the attackers were waiting for them in boats and opened fire. "In order to escape ... I took to the sea," one of the villagers, Henri-Claude Elisme, had said in a sworn deposition. "I climbed aboard my boat; I saw Claude Jean ... fall under the soldiers' bullets." Abdel Saint Louis, a thirty-two-year-old sailor, said, "I fled ... into a boat. At sea I saw another boat arrive. Thinking they were people trying to escape, I came closer to them. I then saw Youfou, a FRAPH member, piloting a group of soldiers. They fired in my direction. I called for help. They arrested me, beat me, and forced me to guide the boat. Seeing other people in a boat, the soldiers fired in their direction and hit two girls: Rosiane and Deborah."

By the end of the assault, according to the prosecution witnesses, dozens of people were wounded and at least six were dead; the prosecution estimated that the actual toll was much higher. Most of the bodies had allegedly been buried in shallow graves along the sea and either eaten by animals or washed away. "When I went down to the shore I saw [my brother's] boat covered in blood," Celony Seraphin testified. "I only found him on April 28 ... tied up with Charité Cadet; both had been murdered. I was not authorized to remove the body ... I demand justice for my brother."

The testimony occasionally elicited angry shouts from the spectators, and the judge would ring his bell, trying to quiet the courtyard. That afternoon Karen Burns, a forensic anthropologist from the United States, was sworn in. A Canadian expert on DNA was scheduled to follow her. It would be the first time that forensic evidence and genetic evidence were introduced in a Haitian court, and the courtyard fell silent. Burns stood in the center of the gathering, surrounded by the skeletal remains of three people, excavated from the edge of the sea in Raboteau in 1995. As she spoke, spectators and jurors craned their necks to look at the bones. Burns held up one and said, "This is the pelvis right here." She put it down and picked up another bone. "This individual was found with a rope tied around his neck, and this is the rope that was retrieved." As she held up the rope, there were several gasps.

Larosiliere—who, like his client, maintains that the massacre was fabricated as propaganda to discredit FRAPH and the military regime—remained unimpressed. "I live for testimony like this," he told me that night, drinking a glass of rum, as we sat with the attaché at the hotel restaurant. "It's bullshit. Come on! [This wouldn't be allowed] in an American courtroom with the federal rules of evidence! She did a scientific study on a site with no integrity. Everyone and everybody walked around it. Come on. You know I can go to graveyards and pick up skeletons from anybody and put them down."

Refilling his glass, Larosiliere said that the prosecution's entire case was preposterous. If there had been any organized military involvement at all, he said, no evidence would have been left on the beach. "Those bodies would be put on a truck, and they'd be taken out on the Rue Nationale—"

"You got it," the attaché agreed.

"—or the highway—"

"At night," the attaché added.

"—and dumped into—"

"The Source Puante," the attaché said.

"Sulfur ditches," Larosiliere explained. "The best place, because the sulfur eats the body."

As he spoke, several international human-rights observers sat down next to us. They stared at Larosiliere, whom they recognized from the courtroom. His voice seemed to grow louder as he noticed them. Finally one of them began to argue with him about Constant. "If for one instant, sir, I believed that Haiti could sustain a true trial for my client, I'd be the first one to throw him on the plane," Larosiliere said.

Later I asked Brian Concannon, an American human-rights lawyer who had spent most of the previous five years in Haiti spearheading the trial, if he thought Larosiliere's concern about the fairness of the tribunal was legitimate. Concannon said he thought it was not. He told me that the judicial system, which had received more than $25 million in American aid for reform, had slowly and steadily evolved in recent years. The judge and one of the prosecutors, for instance, had gone through a training program funded in part by the United States; another prosecutor had gone to France, where he studied at a judicial academy. Concannon said that although it had taken years to accomplish, the trial was extraordinarily fair by any standard. Indeed, he said, it had become a kind of prototype for the judicial system in Haiti. Perhaps most important, despite fears by Constant that he would be killed, not a single defendant so far had been harmed in prison or in a courtroom. "The defendants were given the benefit of all their rights under Haitian law and under international treaties to which Haiti is a party," Concannon said. "They were allowed to present witnesses, alibis, and exculpatory evidence."

From Atlantic Unbound:

Flashbacks: "Nuremberg Revisited" (November 1995)
Two articles from 1946 consider the precedent set at Nuremberg.
As for Constant, Concannon said, the case was based on the same legal precedent used to prosecute Nazi leaders after World War II and, more recently, war criminals in Yugoslavia and Rwanda. "Constant started an organization that was specifically designed to [carry out]—and in fact carried out—massive violations of human rights," he said. "Constant then provided that organization with training, money, and weapons. He has liability as a commander. It was the same with Nuremberg. He was in charge of a criminal organization and is responsible for the crimes of that organization." Though there was no evidence that Constant had been on the scene at Raboteau, Concannon said, there was indisputable evidence that FRAPH members participated in the attack and systematically terrorized the community. And, he said, there was probably more evidence against Constant in the thousands of pages of secret documents confiscated by U.S. soldiers in their 1994 raid on FRAPH headquarters, documents the Clinton Administration had so far refused to return to Haiti—fueling allegations that Washington was trying to conceal its ties to FRAPH and Constant.

On the second day of our visit Larosiliere decided to stage a protest. In the middle of the proceedings he rose from his chair and stood stiffly in the courtroom. The trial came to a halt, and everyone stared at him. Then he marched out the door, the attaché a few feet behind him. There was an angry chorus of murmurs. A prosecution lawyer denounced the move as merely a ruse, a sign that Constant's lawyer had intended from the outset not to use the tribunal for justice but only to discredit it. ("My understanding of an adequate murder defense is that you spend more than a few hours at the trial," Concannon told me. "We've worked on this case full-time for four and a half years.") After Larosiliere left, I sat for a while and stared at the dozens of alleged victims sitting on the back benches. Many of them had bought suits for the trial. The young women, some of whom had been shot, wore white dresses that somehow stayed pristine in the dusty heat; they sat with their backs perfectly straight. On several occasions these people had walked miles to the capital to pressure their government for justice. They had written songs about what had happened. And they sat there now, as rain began to fall, and as a clerk collected the bones strewn on the table, and as rumors filled the country that another coup attempt had been thwarted in the capital. As I finally rose to go, a young man who had seen me arrive with Constant's lawyer stopped me; before I could say anything, he spat at my shoe and walked away.

The Verdict
"T hey tried to get me to come out to beat me up," Constant told me shortly after I returned. He was eating a piece of chocolate cake in a Queens diner. Tensions in the community had intensified since the beginning of the trial. Larosiliere had told him to leave the house during such demonstrations, to avoid confrontations. But Constant always remained nearby. "I have to protect my mother and aunt in case one of them go crazy," he told me. Ricot Dupuy, of Radio Soleil d'Haiti, told me candidly, "There are Haitian groups who have toyed with the idea of taking the law into their own hands and killing him." Constant claims he has a small coterie of supporters who keep an eye out for him. "I can tell you, when they come in front of my place, fifty percent of the people out there are my people," he said. "They pass by in case there is any trouble."

Though it is hard to know the precise numbers, Constant maintains some hold over a small following of former FRAPH members, Tonton Macoutes, soldiers, and Duvalierists who also live in exile. Demonstrators say that in at least one instance a car showed up outside his house to monitor them. "They came by taking pictures of us, and we took pictures of them," Ray Laforest told me.

"I don't want to play a deadly game," Constant said of Laforest, "but I have stuff on him, and ..." He let his thought trail off.

One day I was sitting with Constant in his house, reading a copy of his book manuscript. Someone had helped him write the first few chapters.

My media image, both internationally and in the U.S., has been a source of anguish for me. Topics that suggest my alleged involvement with the CIA, being a human rights abuser, operating "voodoo politics," being a bogeyman, making Haiti "a place of fear," being a "tough guy," a "gunman," "dog," an "attaché," and, last but not least, a "spook," an "S.O.B." and a "double spy" have been a source of wonderment about why I have been so suddenly accused in the media.
As I was reading, the phone rang in the kitchen. Constant went to it, and I could hear him speaking in Creole. A moment later he walked back into the room. "You're here for a part of history," he said. "The verdict came out. I've been sentenced to life imprisonment and to hard labor, and they're taking over all my property in Haiti."

He dropped into his rocking chair, looking around the room. He lit a cigarette and rocked back and forth. Apparently the jury had deliberated for four hours and had found sixteen of the twenty-two defendants in custody guilty, twelve of them for premeditated murder or being accomplices to murder. All those in absentia were convicted of murder and ordered to pay the victims millions of dollars in damages. "I hate to lose my things back home," Constant said, "because eventually my mother has to go back there." He lit another cigarette and pulled on it deeply. "I better call J.D.," he said, referring to Larosiliere. He picked up his cell phone, trying to concentrate. "They have a verdict against me," he said into the phone, leaving a message for his lawyer. "I need to speak to him. Okay? They have sentenced me to life and hard labor!"

A few minutes later the phone rang, and Constant picked it up in a hurry. But it was a reporter asking him for a comment. He stumbled through something and hung up. The phone rang again. It was Larosiliere. "What do you think's going to happen here?" Constant asked nervously. "Okay ... yes ... okay."

He handed me the phone. I could hear Larosiliere's voice crackling through the receiver before I put it to my ear. "I have one word to say about all this: bullshit." Larosiliere said that the Haitian government would now try to extradite Constant, claiming that a legitimate tribunal had convicted him with the blessing of international observers. But, he said, they still had to show that the verdict was fair and prove in a U.S. court that Constant deserved to be sent back. It is important to point out that under Haitian law, if Constant surrenders or is arrested, he will have the right to a new trial.

Constant called me a few days later. His voice was agitated. "There are all these rumors out there that they're about to arrest me," he said, "that they're coming for me." He said he had to check in with the INS the following day, as he did every Tuesday, but he was afraid the authorities might be planning to seize him this time. "Can you meet me there?"

By the time I arrived at the INS office in Manhattan the next morning, he was already standing by the entrance. It was cold, and his trench coat was wrapped around him. He told me that his mother, who was in Florida, had called to tell him that other Haitian exiles had been arrested. I could see circles under his eyes. Pacing back and forth, he said that he had stayed at a friend's house the night before, in case the authorities showed up at his house to arrest him.

I followed him into the elevator and up to the twelfth floor. The room was filled with immigrants. Constant tried to check in at the front desk, where a poster of the Statue of Liberty hung, but the woman there said they weren't ready for him yet. He sat down and started to ponder why he had been kept free for so long. "This is what I'm trying to find out and that nobody has been able to analyze it with me. Why are they keeping me alive? I don't know why, in fact. A friend of mine told me one day, he works for intelligence here, and he said there is somebody, somewhere, that is following everything about me, every court paper, every legal action, every immigration matter, and this is the only person that really knows why they are keeping me alive."

A few minutes later someone yelled out his name, and he leaped to his feet. He approached the desk with his INS form and checked in, as always. The woman took the sheet of paper and walked into a back room, where she consulted with somebody. Then the woman returned and, just like that, Constant was smiling, leading me to the elevator, calling his mother to say he was okay, and rushing across the street to buy a new suit in celebration of his freedom.

The next week two dozen Toto Watchers gathered outside the INS carrying signs that showed alleged FRAPH victims: a murdered boy with a shirt pulled over his head; two men lying in a pool of blood. "We are here to demand that Toto Constant be sent back to Haiti to stand trial for crimes against the Haitian people," Kim Ives, a writer for the Brooklyn-based newspaper Haïti Progrès, yelled through a bullhorn. "If you're opposed to war criminals and to death-squad leaders living as your neighbors in New York City, please join us." Human-rights activists began to join the protesters. There was a sense that this was the last chance to persuade the U.S. government to send Constant back to Haiti—that if it wouldn't do so now, after the conviction, it never would. A UN expert on Haiti, Adama Dieng, who had served as an impartial observer at the trial, had already called the verdict "a landmark in [the] fight against impunity," and in one of the last moves of the Clinton Administration, according to two U.S. officials, the documents confiscated during the raid on FRAPH headquarters had been sent back to Haiti. So far the files have not been made public, but they may contain more evidence of FRAPH's crimes and could add to the case for Constant's extradition. Still, most activists remain skeptical. Brian Concannon told me after the trial, "The presence of such a horrible killer in the U.S. shows that the U.S. supports those activities. There is, unfortunately, no other credible explanation."

Outside the INS office several in the crowd were bent over, trying to light candles in the freezing wind. "How can they not send him back?" a Haitian man asked me. "He has been found guilty by a Haitian court. Why is the CIA protecting him?" Suddenly there was a loud, unified chant from the crowd: "Toto Constant, you can't hide! We charge you with genocide!"

Au Revoir?
A t one of our last meetings, after Jean-Bertrand Aristide and George W. Bush had each been sworn in to their respective offices, Constant called and said he had to see me. His legal status remained unchanged. He had been talking to his "advisers," he said, and he needed to tell me something. The political terrain had shifted in both countries, he said. There was more and more resistance to Aristide, even in Queens. Bombs had recently exploded in Port-au-Prince, and the regime had blamed Constant. He denied any role, but he said that Haitians from all over were calling, waiting for him to act, to step up.

At the Haitian restaurant where we met, he told me that people had "been publishing articles, and they say, 'Look at this guy who has been convicted for murder in Haiti and he's getting stronger and stronger every day.'" He sipped a glass of rum. "A lot of people in Haiti are watching me. They haven't heard from me. They don't know what's going to happen, but everyone has their eyes on me, and people are sending me their phone numbers from Haiti. People here try to reach me. Political leaders are trying to reach me. There is a perception that if ... Aristide is on the go, I'm the only one that can step in. I can't let that thing get to my head. I have to be very careful and analyze it and make it work for me."

As people entered the restaurant, Constant looked over his shoulder to check them out. He waited for two Haitian men to sit down, and then he turned back to me and said that he had to do something dramatic or he would be a hostage in Queens for the rest of his life. "If I stand up and make a press conference, and even if I don't say anything but I just attack Aristide, that's going to give strength to the opposition down there, that's going to give strength to the former military, that's going to give strength to the former FRAPH members, that's going to give strength to everyone who didn't have the guts because they didn't see who would take the lead." He had recently received a new spate of death threats, he said. Someone had gotten hold of his cell-phone number and had warned, "I'm going to get you no matter what you do." I asked if he was afraid of what might happen if he so brazenly broke his gag order and called a press conference. He said that he wasn't sure what would happen, but it was his destiny. "I've been prepared since young for a mission, and that's why I've stayed alive," he said. He glanced over his shoulder again, and then he leaned toward me. "I'm either going to be President of Haiti," he said, "or I'm going to be killed."

Share  Tweet  Comments
LATEST VIDEO


How the News Media Fails Viewers

Jon Lovett wonders if political commentary has become theater criticism.
Most Popular

 Have Smartphones Destroyed a Generation?
JEAN M. TWENGE
One day last summer, around noon, I called Athena, a 13-year-old who lives in Houston, Texas. She answered her phone—she’s had an iPhone since she was 11—sounding as if she’d just woken up. We chatted about her favorite songs and TV shows, and I asked her what she likes to do with her friends. “We go to the mall,” she said. “Do your parents drop you off?,” I asked, recalling my own middle-school days, in the 1980s, when I’d enjoy a few parent-free hours shopping with my friends. “No—I go with my family,” she replied. “We’ll go with my mom and brothers and walk a little behind them. I just have to tell my mom where we’re going. I have to check in every hour or every 30 minutes.”

Those mall trips are infrequent—about once a month. More often, Athena and her friends spend time together on their phones, unchaperoned. Unlike the teens of my generation, who might have spent an evening tying up the family landline with gossip, they talk on Snapchat, the smartphone app that allows users to send pictures and videos that quickly disappear. They make sure to keep up their Snapstreaks, which show how many days in a row they have Snapchatted with each other. Sometimes they save screenshots of particularly ridiculous pictures of friends. “It’s good blackmail,” Athena said. (Because she’s a minor, I’m not using her real name.) She told me she’d spent most of the summer hanging out alone in her room with her phone. That’s just the way her generation is, she said. “We didn’t have a choice to know any life without iPads or iPhones. I think we like our phones more than we like actual people.”

CONTINUE READING
 How America Lost Its Mind
KURT ANDERSEN
When did America become untethered from reality?

I first noticed our national lurch toward fantasy in 2004, after President George W. Bush’s political mastermind, Karl Rove, came up with the remarkable phrase reality-based community. People in “the reality-based community,” he told a reporter, “believe that solutions emerge from your judicious study of discernible reality … That’s not the way the world really works anymore.” A year later, The Colbert Report went on the air. In the first few minutes of the first episode, Stephen Colbert, playing his right-wing-populist commentator character, performed a feature called “The Word.” His first selection: truthiness. “Now, I’m sure some of the ‘word police,’ the ‘wordinistas’ over at Webster’s, are gonna say, ‘Hey, that’s not a word!’ Well, anybody who knows me knows that I’m no fan of dictionaries or reference books.

CONTINUE READING
 Trump Is 'Locked and Loaded' in a Nuclear Game of Chicken
KRISHNADEV CALAMUR
President Trump this week has gone from saying the U.S. will respond to North Korean threats with “fire and fury like the world has never seen” to clarifying those words were perhaps not “tough enough,” and to spelling out Friday, in case there were doubts, that the U.S. military was “locked and loaded” to counter any threat.

 Follow
Donald J. Trump ✔ @realDonaldTrump
Military solutions are now fully in place,locked and loaded,should North Korea act unwisely. Hopefully Kim Jong Un will find another path!
7:29 PM - Aug 11, 2017
 24,791 24,791 Replies   22,896 22,896 Retweets   58,626 58,626 likes
Twitter Ads info and privacy
The comments are likely to attract criticism, given that they raise already high tensions with North Korea, a nation that now possesses intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of reaching the U.S.; is said to possess a miniaturized nuclear device it can fit into that missile; and has threatened in recent days to strike near Guam, the U.S. territory in the Pacific that is home to U.S. military bases. But the remarks also raise questions about what sort of response the U.S. is considering in the event the North Korean leader decides to flex his military muscles.

CONTINUE READING
 East German border policemen refusing to shake hands with a Berliner over the border fence in November, 1989 Is the World Slouching Toward a Grave Systemic Crisis?
PHILIP ZELIKOW
On August 5, Philip Zelikow delivered the following keynote address at the annual meeting of the Aspen Strategy Group, a discussion forum for experts and government practitioners. Zelikow, who is currently the White Burkett Miller Professor of History at the University of Virginia, has served at all levels of American government, and for administrations of both parties—including roles at the White House, State Department, and Pentagon. He was also the executive director of the 9/11 Commission. In this speech he reflects on the much-discussed concept of “world order,” interrogates the claim that a “more open” world is really better for Americans, and issues a warning about America’s world leadership. The full text is below.

CONTINUE READING
 How to Deal With North Korea
MARK BOWDEN
点击这里阅读中文版本 | Read this article in Chinese.

Thirty minutes. That’s about how long it would take a nuclear-tipped intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) launched from North Korea to reach Los Angeles. With the powers in Pyongyang working doggedly toward making this possible—building an ICBM and shrinking a nuke to fit on it—analysts now predict that Kim Jong Un will have the capability before Donald Trump completes one four-year term.

About which the president has tweeted, simply, “It won’t happen!”

Though given to reckless oaths, Trump is not in this case saying anything that departs significantly from the past half century of futile American policy toward North Korea. Preventing the Kim dynasty from having a nuclear device was an American priority long before Pyongyang exploded its first nuke, in 2006, during the administration of George W. Bush. The Kim regime detonated four more while Barack Obama was in the White House. In the more than four decades since Richard Nixon held office, the U.S. has tried to control North Korea by issuing threats, conducting military exercises, ratcheting up diplomatic sanctions, leaning on China, and most recently, it seems likely, committing cybersabotage.

CONTINUE READING
 Are Index Funds Evil?
FRANK PARTNOY
If you’re like me, you’ve cheered the decades-long rise of index funds—investment vehicles that seem (these days) to be a rare case of financial innovation that actually helps regular people. By trying merely to match the market, not beat it—investing passively in stocks that mimic a published market index, like the S&P 500—they’re able to offer both low fees and peace of mind for people not inclined to try to pick which stocks to buy and sell.

Index funds have grown exponentially since John Bogle founded Vanguard in the mid-1970s. The top three families of index funds each manage trillions of dollars, collectively holding 15 to 20 percent of all the stock of major U.S. corporations. Best of all for their investors, index funds have consistently beaten the performance of stock-pickers and actively managed funds, whose higher fees may support the Manhattan lifestyle of many bankers, but turn out not to deliver much to customers.

CONTINUE READING
 Mitch McConnell and President Trump shake hands. Why Is Trump Turning on the Ally He Needs Most?
DAVID A. GRAHAM
The three people with the greatest power over Donald Trump’s political future are Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, Special Counsel Robert Mueller, and Trump himself.

And if the president’s recent treatment of McConnell and Mueller is any indication, Trump had better watch out.

The president is on a sustained campaign against the leader of the Senate. For the second day in a row, Trump broke from his vacation to attack the Kentuckian:

 Follow
Donald J. Trump ✔ @realDonaldTrump
Mitch, get back to work and put Repeal & Replace, Tax Reform & Cuts and a great Infrastructure Bill on my desk for signing. You can do it!
12:40 AM - Aug 11, 2017
 35,364 35,364 Replies   27,701 27,701 Retweets   103,839 103,839 likes
Twitter Ads info and privacy
The tweet came 10 minutes after Trump was scheduled to lunch with Vice President Pence, who has been an intermediary between Capitol Hill and the White House.

CONTINUE READING
 A total solar eclipse in Svalbard, Longyearbyen, Norway, on March 20, 2015 Annie Dillard's Classic Essay: 'Total Eclipse'
ANNIE DILLARD
Ever since it was first published in 1982, readers—including this one—have thrilled to “Total Eclipse,” Annie Dillard’s masterpiece of literary nonfiction, which describes her personal experience of a solar eclipse in Washington State. It first appeared in Dillard’s landmark collection, Teaching a Stone to Talk, and was recently republished in The Abundance, a new anthology of her work. The Atlantic is pleased to offer the essay in full, here, until the day after the ‘Great American Eclipse’ on August 21.

-Ross Andersen

It had been like dying, that sliding down the mountain pass. It had been like the death of someone, irrational, that sliding down the mountain pass and into the region of dread. It was like slipping into fever, or falling down that hole in sleep from which you wake yourself whimpering. We had crossed the mountains that day, and now we were in a strange place—a hotel in central Washington, in a town near Yakima. The eclipse we had traveled here to see would occur early in the next morning.

CONTINUE READING
 French President Emmanuel Macron Emmanuel Macron: Monsieur Unpopular
YASMEEN SERHAN
Emmanuel Macron has said that he wants to govern like the Roman god Jupiter, staying above the fray of everyday government issues. But less than three months into the French president’s time in office, his poll numbers are proving just how mortal he is. U.K.-based pollster YouGov reported a seven-point drop in the young leader’s approval rating, which fell from 43 to 36 percent over the month of July. French pollster Ifop observed a similar decline over the same period, noting that: “Apart from Jacques Chirac in July 1995, a newly elected president has never seen his popularity rate falling as quickly during the summer after the election.”

The popularity decline is a stark shift from June, when both Macron and his prime minister, Édouard Philippe, saw their approval ratings rise from 62 to 64 percent and 55 to 64 percent, respectively. But their level of popularity isn’t entirely outside the norm. Former President François Hollande enjoyed 56 percent approval at the same stage of his presidency; his predecessor Nicolas Sarkozy’s was higher, standing at 66 percent.

CONTINUE READING
 The Mars Curiosity rover Why the Curiosity Rover Stopped Singing 'Happy Birthday' to Itself
MARINA KOREN
When the Curiosity rover studies soil on Mars, it does it with a little shimmy. Its robotic arm collects a pinch of soil and drops it into the sample-analysis unit in the robot’s belly. The unit vibrates at different frequencies, shaking the powdery sample so it settles down into small cups. There, the unit heats up the soil, causing the grains to release fumes that scientists can study for hints of organic compounds.

In August 2013, NASA decided to use the sample-analysis unit’s vibrations for something a little different. To celebrate the mission’s first successful year on Mars, engineers programmed the unit to vibrate to a musical tune. From inside a Martian crater, millions of miles away from home, Curiosity sang “Happy Birthday” to itself.

CONTINUE READING
 ‘Holy Shit, We’re in a Cult’
JACLYN SKURIE AND NICOLAS POLLOCK
EnlightenNext was an organization that promised spiritual awakening. Instead, it turned into a complicated, often-sinister community.

WATCH VIDEO
 What Does 'Late Capitalism' Really Mean?
LEAH VARJACQUES, ALICE ROTH, AND ANNIE LOWREY
The intellectual meme for a garbage economy

WATCH VIDEO
 Can Single People Be Happy?
KASIA CIEPLAK-MAYR VON BALDEGG, SAM PRICE-WALDMAN, AND GREYSON KORHONEN
We asked experts.

WATCH VIDEO
MORE POPULAR STORIES
Home
Share
Tweet
Next story in Global
Subscribe
Get 10 issues a year and save 65% off the cover price.


Name
Name
Address 1
Address 1
Address 2
Address 2
City
City
StateZip Code
Zip
Country
United States
Email Address
Email
 ORDER NOW
Fraud Alert regarding The Atlantic
Newsletters
The Atlantic
  The Atlantic Daily
  This Week
  This Month
  New Photo Galleries
  Top Videos This Week
  Politics & Policy Daily
CityLab
  Today’s Top Stories
  This Week's Most Popular Stories

  I want to receive updates from partners and sponsors.
Email Address
Email
 SIGN UP
Follow
FacebookTwitterLinkedInInstagramTumblrPinterestRSSApp Store
About
Masthead
FAQ
Press
Jobs
Shop
Books
Emporium
Manage Subscription
Contact Us
Send a News Tip
Privacy Policy
Advertise
Advertising Guidelines
Terms and Conditions
Responsible Disclosure
Site Map
TheAtlantic.com Copyright (c) 2017 by The Atlantic Monthly Group. All Rights Reserved.

BuzzFeed
Videos
Quizzes
Tasty
More

Search

Louise Pomeroy for BuzzFeed News

TRENDING
260,681 VIEWS
This Girl Has Been Missing For 19 Years, But You’ve Probably Never Heard Of Her
Lost amid the flurry of attention that focuses on missing white girls and women are the names of black girls who disappear. Veronica Pate's daughter, ShyShy, is one of them.

Posted on July 31, 2017, at 11:37 p.m.
 Jessica Testa
Jessica Testa
BuzzFeed News Reporter
Perry, Georgia
Reporting From
Perry, Georgia
More
What do you want to say to her? Do you believe she’s still alive?

Veronica Pate can answer in her sleep. “I miss her and I love her and I’m waiting on her to return home,” the 51-year-old mother has said every few years for the past 19, whenever the local TV reporters in central Georgia have come knocking. “In my heart I feel she’s alive.” They dutifully air her words, and another few years go by before they ask the same questions again.

Pate’s daughter, ShyShy, has been missing since Sept. 4, 1998. The 8-year-old was supposed to ride with her older sister to a high school football game that night, but when it was time to go, her sister couldn’t find her. The Dooly County Sheriff's Department, the Georgia Bureau of Investigations, and the FBI couldn’t find ShyShy in the following days, weeks, months, and years, either.

Veronica Pate is photographed near where ShyShy was last seen in Unadilla, Georgia.
Kevin D. Liles for BuzzFeed News
Veronica Pate is photographed near where ShyShy was last seen in Unadilla, Georgia.
Stories involving missing children have captivated the public since at least the ‘80s, when widespread panic over stranger-snatching first struck American families. Children had gone missing before that decade, but it was in 1985 that their faces began appearing en masse on milk cartons, forcing parents to consider their worst fears every day at the breakfast table. And it was in 1988 that America’s Most Wanted first aired, hosted by John Walsh, the father of a 6-year-old named Adam who had been kidnapped and murdered in 1981.

In the ‘90s, soapy made-for-TV movies about missing children replaced the true-life stories on the milk cartons. In the ‘00s, Elizabeth Smart and Jaycee Dugard became household names for surviving their kidnappings. Today, there are Academy Award–winning movies (Room) and Netflix series (Stranger Things, Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt) and true-crime podcasts (too many to name) about abducted minors. And as the years have passed, the news media has developed a familiar script around these cases. Reporters interview the mothers on the anniversaries of their children’s disappearances. They ask them what they want to say. They ask them if they think they’re still alive.

“If there’s a missing white woman, we’re gonna cover that, every day.”
But nearly all of the cases that graduate from local to national news have something in common. It’s what the late journalist Gwen Ifill in 2004 casually coined "missing white woman syndrome." “If there’s a missing white woman, we’re gonna cover that, every day,” Ifill said. She was referring to the media’s fixation on the disappearances of white women and girls, often upper- and middle-class white women and girls — think Elizabeth Smart — compared with the lack of coverage given to missing people of color and those with low incomes. The phrase finally put a name to the outrage that had been weaving in and out of public consciousness, driven by scholars, activists, and other journalists critical of the mainstream media’s tunnel vision.

Earlier this year, criticism of missing white woman syndrome didn’t so much weave back into the news cycle as bulldoze into it, when a shocking story went viral: Fourteen black girls went missing in Washington, DC, in one 24-hour period. Throughout the first half of March, activists and celebrities and their followers spread the haunting figure on Instagram. Members of the Congressional Black Caucus wrote the Justice Department asking the federal government to investigate. With the hashtag #MissingDCGirls, thousands on Twitter decried the media for going so long without covering the epidemic, for perpetrating missing white woman syndrome.

View image on Twitter
View image on Twitter
 Follow
DC Police Department ✔ @DCPoliceDept
Missing Person: Shaniah Boyd, last seen 3/18 in 4000 blk 6th St, SE. Seen her? Call 202-727-9099. #MissingPerson
9:49 AM - Mar 22, 2017
 18 18 Replies   990 990 Retweets   247 247 likes
Twitter Ads info and privacy
One of the missing-person tweets that was part of the #MissingDCGirls controversy.
The number, it turned out, was hugely inaccurate, a botched interpretation of police data. But it resonated with so many people in the age of Black Lives Matter and on the heels of the Women’s March because it seemed like it could be true. According to the FBI, nearly 56% of the country’s reported missing minors in 2016 were girls, and nearly 39% of those kids were black. In 2014, 64,000 black women and girls were missing, according to the Black and Missing Foundation, a DC-based nonprofit dedicated to raising public awareness and helping families of missing people of color.

In 2014, 64,000 black women and girls were missing, according to the Black and Missing Foundation.
The viral sprawl of the false DC story meant that people who’d never heard of missing white woman syndrome suddenly had the phrase in their vocabularies. But by the end of April, the public had largely moved on. “The story became a fad and died,” said Natalie Wilson, cofounder of the Black and Missing Foundation. Mainstream media didn’t obsessively cover the five days in June between the disappearance of 12-year-old Naomi Jones, a black Florida girl, and the discovery of her body in a creek, or the four days in July between the abduction of Shavon Randle, a 13-year-old black Texas girl, and the finding of her body in an abandoned home. In the first week of May, three black South Carolina girls separately disappeared. Two of them were eventually found safe; the third, an 8-year-old, was found dead. They had no hashtags.

In 1998, everyone in ShyShy Pate’s neighborhood knew her, and everyone in her small town of Unadilla, Georgia, knew that she disappeared. Many were questioned by authorities, and even more opened up their homes to be searched — though it took more than 14 hours for authorities to begin looking for ShyShy in earnest, a mammoth lag that still haunts investigators and her family.

But few people outside middle Georgia have ever heard ShyShy’s name. The Pate family has felt the attention swell and dwindle (and mostly dwindle) for nearly two decades. They’ve struggled to keep the news media interested in the case. They’ve turned to social media, but it’s been hard to get followers there, too. On Facebook, there are almost too many missing kids; the Searching for ShyShy page has just 70 followers. Last fall, ShyShy’s family organized a 5K walk, selling T-shirts to promote awareness for her case and raise funds for the missing-children campaign Rock One Sock. They ended up $500 in the red. No one is searching for ShyShy anymore, outside a handful of her loved ones in Georgia.

Which raises two questions that Veronica Pate can’t answer quite so quickly, even after these 19 years: Is it because they’re black? Is it because they’re poor?

ShyShy's Bible at her mother's home in Perry, Georgia.
Kevin D. Liles for BuzzFeed News
ShyShy's Bible at her mother's home in Perry, Georgia.
ShyShy is a nickname. Her full name is Shy’Kemmia Shy’Rezz. Kemmia came from the word "leukemia," which the pregnant Pate saw one day at the store, on the side of a coin-donation box for leukemia research, and thought it sounded pretty.

ShyShy was sick a lot — with severe asthma, among other illnesses — but she could never stay still. She was a playful kid, always dirty from riding her bike around outside. She sung in the church choir and promised her aunt she’d perform at her wedding. She was sweet by her mother’s word and aggravating by her older sister’s. One year for her mom’s birthday, ShyShy gave her a card with a $1 bill inside. “She said, ‘That’s all the money I have. I don’t have no more,’” Pate remembered.

No one is searching for ShyShy anymore, outside a handful of her loved ones in Georgia.
The three of them — Pate, her 36-year-old daughter LaSwanda Hickey (chief T-shirt designer), and her 45-year-old sister Rotando Freeman (social media wrangler) — are the ones who talk about ShyShy today. Pate lives in Perry, Georgia, a city more than three times the size of Unadilla; she moved out of the Unadilla projects where ShyShy last lived nine years ago. The new apartment is just 17 miles away from her old one, but it feels a world away. Most people who lived in Unadilla back in ‘98 have moved away (“or died,” Hickey offered, dryly).

So it’s in Pate’s Perry living room that the women gathered to tell the story of ShyShy — her childhood, her quirks, the last time they saw her — one afternoon in June, interrupted only by one or more of Pate’s grandchildren galloping down the stairs to pull ice pops from their grandma’s freezer.

In September 1998, ShyShy had just entered third grade. She was weeks away from her ninth birthday. It was high school football season, and Hickey, then a senior and member of the ROTC, performed in the color guard. On the evening of Sept. 4, while Hickey got ready for the home game, ShyShy went to play outside.

In their neighborhood, everyone knew everyone, and all their kids played in their sun-scorched yards together. It was a rough place — men sold drugs on the street and gambled on tables at the club across from their apartment — but no one considered it unsafe for kids. Never in Unadilla or all of Dooly County before or since ShyShy went missing had a child been abducted, the sheriff's office said. Later, when the sheriff began investigating her disappearance — turning the club across from the Pate home into the case's headquarters — known dealers in the area worked closely with deputies to help find ShyShy.

She was last seen standing outside a neighbor’s house at the intersection closest to her apartment. Hickey waved to her there, right before she went to pick up a friend. ShyShy was wearing a neon-green Atlanta Braves jersey, with jeans and white K-Swiss tennis shoes. But when Hickey and her friend circled back to pick up ShyShy, the little girl wasn’t there.

The home where ShyShy lived in Unadilla when she went missing in 1998. She was last seen standing a block away.
Kevin D. Liles for BuzzFeed News
The home where ShyShy lived in Unadilla when she went missing in 1998. She was last seen standing a block away.
At first no one panicked. ShyShy could have found another ride to the game. Or she could just be playing with another neighborhood kid at someone’s house. Neighbors started looking for her, but it didn’t hit anyone that ShyShy was really gone until Hickey came home from the game that night without her sister. Then Pate called the police.

According to Pate, an officer from the Unadilla Police Department told her that ShyShy had to be gone 24 hours before she could be considered missing.

When the lead investigator in ShyShy’s disappearance looks back on her case, this moment is the one that stings. The Dooly County Sheriff's Department didn’t learn about the case until late the following morning, depriving the investigation of valuable time and evidence: The neighborhood search party inadvertently covered up what might have been ShyShy’s scent and tracks. More importantly, there is no protocol that children have to be missing for 24 hours until searching begins; even in cases involving adults, that time frame is largely a myth or misconception. But it was a young officer who responded to the Pates, Dooly County investigator Randy Lamberth said.

“We're a lower-middle-class black family (with) no money. And my criminal record has stopped people from looking for my child, which it should not.”
“I wish we could have gotten involved with it from day one, instead of being 14 to 16 hours behind,” Lamberth said. (The Unadilla Police Department was dissolved in 2008, and area policing has been taken over by the sheriff's department.)

Lamberth is the one who finally launched the investigation into ShyShy’s disappearance, after visiting the Pate family the next morning. He brought out the Georgia Bureau of Investigations. They brought out the fire department to begin ground and grid searches, the Georgia State Patrol’s aviation unit to take aerial photos for 10 square miles, and the FBI to enter ShyShy into the National Crime Information Center system. Deputies searched the back roads of Unadilla while federal agents conducted interviews and followed up on out-of-state leads. For weeks, authorities worked 12-hour or longer days, every day, Lamberth said. A reward of $15,000 was eventually offered after all immediate family members in Georgia at the time of ShyShy’s disappearance passed lie-detector tests.

But if the police department had taken Veronica Pate’s call seriously in the first place, if the responding officer had reported the case to the sheriff's office immediately, all that manpower would have come sooner, in the critical hours after ShyShy went missing. That night she would have had more than just neighbors yelling her name in the dark.

Downtown Unadilla.
Kevin D. Liles for BuzzFeed News
Downtown Unadilla.
The DC missing black girls story that went viral in March was drawn from the Twitter account of DC's Metropolitan Police Department, which had just begun tweeting out missing-persons flyers. But the account was posting all of the department’s active-case flyers at once — not tweeting them live as the cases came in, as many on Twitter had interpreted. Though the department tried to clarify that there had been no spike in missing-persons cases, no 24-hour surge, and that their missing-persons cases had actually decreased since 2014, the viral storm couldn’t be stopped.

The DC mayor and police chief held public meetings with outraged residents, who didn’t just blame the media for not covering black girls' disappearances, but also law enforcement for its perceived bias against black families — its belief that black children aren’t kidnapped the way white children are.

The relationship between families of missing black girls and law enforcement can be precarious. The Black and Missing Foundation, an organization founded by two black women, often points out that families of color historically don’t trust law enforcement, which can lead to delays in calling police. Wilson said that’s because of the stereotypes police often attach to missing black children. “Many times when a child goes missing, especially a child of color, they’re classified as a runaway,” she said. “They don’t receive an AMBER alert or any type of media coverage.”

One Tuesday this past June, 12-year-old black twin sisters in Florida disappeared for three days, found eventually at the home of a family friend. While they were missing, police told reporters the girls were “runaways … They’re not abducted. The father went to work [and] they never went to school.” But when police asked for the public’s help to find the girls, many pushed back on the cops’ “runaways” classification, asking why the girls did not receive an AMBER Alert. “How does the police dept know they are runaways, what clues do you have?” one woman challenged the department on Facebook. The department insisted, defensively, the girls did not meet the Department of Justice’s criteria for an AMBER Alert, which include police believing that a missing child has been abducted and is in imminent danger.

A decade ago, in 2007, continued frustration around criteria for AMBER Alerts led to creation of the Rilya Alert, named in memory of a 4-year-old black girl, Rilya Wilson, who vanished while in the Florida foster care system. Founded by a small nonprofit called Peas in Their Pod, the Rilya Alert has broader criteria than the AMBER Alert, allowing for the inclusion of missing children classified as runaways. But neither the Rilya Alert nor the nationwide AMBER Alert system existed when ShyShy Pate went missing.

 Photos of a young ShyShy and an age-progression photo of what she might look like today.
View this post on Facebook
ShyShy Pate / FaceBook / Via facebook.com
Photos of a young ShyShy and an age-progression photo of what she might look like today.
The Pate family is aware of the racial dynamics of her case — that is, that all of them are black and all of the investigators are white. Just look at the age-progression pictures that agencies have distributed over the years, which the Pates say have never been able to get ShyShy’s skin tone, lips, or hair quite right.

But it’s not more diversity that police departments or investigative agencies need the most to better serve families of color, Wilson of the Black and Missing Foundation said. It’s training. Training that doesn’t lead officers to default to “she’s a runaway” or “she’ll turn up eventually” — training that would have led to ShyShy’s search beginning immediately, not 14 hours later. And sensitivity training, Wilson added. Often family members who have a criminal record are immediately suspected to be involved in a child of color’s disappearance, she said.

Members of ShyShy's family are photographed near where she was last seen. From left: Rotando Freeman (ShyShy's aunt), Veronica Pate (ShyShy's mother), Regina Manning (ShyShy's godmother), and Dorothy Blackshear (ShyShy's aunt).
Kevin D. Liles for BuzzFeed News
Members of ShyShy's family are photographed near where she was last seen. From left: Rotando Freeman (ShyShy's aunt), Veronica Pate (ShyShy's mother), Regina Manning (ShyShy's godmother), and Dorothy Blackshear (ShyShy's aunt).
Even Lamberth, who spearheaded damage control after those 14 hours and has maintained a good relationship with the Pate family — he was the only white participant of last year’s 5K walk for ShyShy — has repeatedly described ShyShy as “street-smart” in interviews over the years, as if the 8-year-old could or should have known better than to be kidnapped.

Still, ShyShy’s family is not convinced that she would have been found by now if she were white, or that her case has been handled any differently because she’s black. They point to an 11-year-old white girl named Teresa Dean who went missing in Macon, 50 miles from Unadilla, the year after ShyShy disappeared. She still hasn’t been found, either.

“I think money is the bigger issue than color,” Hickey said.

“Oh, if she was a white rich kid, they probably would have found her that same day,” Freeman added. “We wouldn’t have had to depend on the police department. We would have had the resources to have private investigators, the whole nine yards.”

But beyond not having money, the Pates don’t have time on their side anymore. Too much of it has passed. Who can even remember the lost girl from Unadilla? That adorable 8-year-old is now almost 28. (And where is Unadilla again, anyway?) The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children used to send Pate free stacks of posters each month featuring ShyShy’s photo and information to distribute locally. “They don’t send them to me anymore,” she said.

“Money is the difference,” Hickey repeated.

“If you got money then you can make things happen,” Freeman said.

Ask Randy Lamberth if he believes ShyShy is alive and he will look you straight in the eye. “Honestly?” he’ll ask, a bit awkwardly. “No, ma’am.”

He’s never really this said out loud to Pate. “Not directly, but kind of indirectly,” Lamberth said. “I don't want to kill the family's hopes. But just statistics and everything says that she's not. … With her age, I think she would have tried to contact family, and there's been no attempts.”

A sign for ShyShy sits outside her mother's home in Perry, Georgia.
Kevin D. Liles for BuzzFeed News
A sign for ShyShy sits outside her mother's home in Perry, Georgia.
The family has their own theory. They believe, first of all, that ShyShy is alive. But maybe she's been brainwashed. It’s not unheard of. She was young when she was taken, and maybe she was convinced by her kidnapper that her family didn’t want her anymore. Michelle Knight, one of three Ohio women who escaped kidnapper Ariel Castro in 2013, said Castro convinced her that no one wanted her or was looking for her, and she was 21 when she was abducted.

In missing children investigations, there can be emotional necessity to conceal some information from the family. When new leads have come in over the years, Pate hasn’t wanted to hear about them until they’re chased down. Once, a few months after ShyShy disappeared, a body was found in Cobb County, Georgia. The late Dooly County Sheriff Van Peavy called Pate to say, “I don’t know if it’s our baby, but I gotta go see,” Pate recalled. Pate, distressed, told the sheriff to wait until the next morning to give her the news. But it wasn’t ShyShy; it was the body of an 11-year-old boy. Pate remembers that he was wearing red jeans when he was found.

The family has only accidentally found out about other leads, like in 2012, when police received a tip that a young Facebook user in Michigan looked an awful lot like ShyShy. A GBI sketch artist said she didn’t think it was the same person, but the resemblance was too close to rule out, Lamberth said. So he, Sheriff Peavy, and a GBI agent drove to Detroit together, only to discover when they arrived that the girl looked like ShyShy because she was ShyShy’s cousin.

In the first few weeks of ShyShy’s investigation, there were eight to ten leads a day, Lamberth said. Now there are still about two to three leads a year. The emergency of ShyShy’s disappearance has faded into more of a cold fact of daily life. Though ShyShy’s case is still considered an active investigation, the most promising lead to date was that cousin on Facebook. Lamberth believes her case will never be closed.

But there’s something else he’s concealed from the family after all these years: Not only does the investigator believe ShyShy is dead, but he thinks he knows who killed her.

“My true theory is it involves one person, one person only,” Lamberth said. There was a man, Lamberth said, who provided information during interviews with investigators back in 1998 that aligned with the FBI's profile of the suspect. Lamberth said he believes this man kidnapped and killed ShyShy in a spontaneous fit of anger.

In either scenario — whether ShyShy has been murdered or brainwashed — the evidence just isn’t there, even if the theories are.

Alexis Patterson went missing on May 3, 2002, nearly four years after ShyShy did. She was last seen walking to her Milwaukee elementary school on a Friday morning. She was 7.

Though she may lack name recognition, Alexis is arguably the most important figure in the short history of missing white woman syndrome, because she went missing at the same time as one of the most publicized missing children in American history: Elizabeth Smart.

Elizabeth disappeared on June 5, 2002, about one month after Alexis did. She was 14 and abducted from her parents’ Utah home. It took Milwaukee reporters — who were diligently covering Alexis's disappearance — about a week before they began to draw comparisons between the two cases.

“The national media flocked to Salt Lake City to tell the nation about Elizabeth Smart,” they wrote. “Why haven't the reporters descended on Milwaukee to tell the nation about Alexis Patterson?”

The reporters said that since Alexis had gone missing, 67 newspaper and magazine stories had been written about her, mostly by them (the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel) and by the Associated Press. They compared that to the 400 stories written about Smart in the 10 days following her abduction.

Here is an archive of our #AlexisPatterson news coverage dating back to May 5, 2002: https://t.co/2HZNl86zz3
Journal Sentinel
@journalsentinel
Here is an archive of our #AlexisPatterson news coverage dating back to May 5, 2002: https://t.co/2HZNl86zz3
01:30 PM - 10 Jul 2016
Reply Retweet Favorite
After the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel called out this discrepancy, other American media outlets began to pay attention. CNN asked, “Missing kids: Has media coverage been fair?” CBS News said it was “A Tale of Two Kidnappings.” ABC News called Alexis the “‘Other’ Missing Girl.” But what this meant was although Alexis's story had finally made it to the national stage, it was never about the missing girl or her community’s desperate search to find her. Alexis Patterson’s disappearance became a forum on media ethics; journalism professors were interviewed rather than grieving parents. No national outlets covered what was happening on the ground in Milwaukee, like the racist flyers found posted around America's Black Holocaust Museum, which asked why white people should care about Alexis.

"We're not in control of the media," Alexis's stepfather, LaRon Bourgeois, told the National Association of Black Journalists at the time. Bourgeois was an early suspect in the search for Alexis due to an alleged failed polygraph and a criminal record.

“We're a lower-middle-class black family (with) no money. And my criminal record has stopped people from looking for my child, which it should not,” he said.

ShyShy was also from a lower-middle-class black family with no money. She had family members with criminal records, too. The stories just keep repeating themselves; Alexis's kidnapping came four years after ShyShy’s. Five years later, Chimoa Gray was kidnapped at 15 in a wild teenage flee-to-Mexico plot that should have made international headlines but didn’t. Four years after Chimoa disappeared, 2-year-old Detroit girl Bianca Jones went missing; her body has never been found, but her father was convicted of her murder.

And those are just cases that have received mild media attention — enough to fill a page or two of Google results. None of these girls reached the same level of urgent fame as Elizabeth Smart. None of these girls will be the subject of a new 2017 TV docuseries like Natalee Holloway, the blonde white teenager who disappeared in 2005 while on vacation in Aruba and dominated network news for months. None of these girls will have a legacy, beyond being forgotten. And then remembered. And then forgotten again.

"We have nothing against the other kids that have been missing," Bourgeois said after Alexis went missing. "We want the same attention for our child so we can have just as much a chance of getting her back as they do."

That was back in 2002. In April of this year, following the viral DC story, the recently formed Congressional Caucus on Black Women and Girls held a public forum, announcing they were working on an official report offering solutions to the problem of missing black girls. Wilson with the Black and Missing Foundation was invited to participate. But beyond this congressional report — which was promised by the end of the year, but which Wilson hasn’t heard about since — Wilson hasn’t seen any significant efforts or conversations among lawmakers or law enforcement to address missing black girls. She doesn’t see much from the black community, either.

“I don’t really think our community understands the depth of the issue,” Wilson said — in part because “we don’t necessarily see ourselves in the news. We’ve come a long way. We’re starting to see more children or people of color featured on news when they go missing. But there are many cases that don’t make the news cycle.”

Social media has helped; it’s the one place where it’s been proven that missing black girls and women can get attention. In 2011, Wilson recalled, she had to beg St. Louis TV news stations to cover missing college student Phoenix Coldon’s disappearance. The stations turned her down at first, Wilson said, telling her they didn’t have time, brushing her off. So Wilson used Facebook and Twitter, blasting out Coldon’s image and information. Once this began, a producer from the local Fox affiliate agreed to also broadcast Coldon’s picture, Wilson said, for a “couple of seconds.” Coldon is still missing.

The last photos taken of ShyShy.
Kevin D. Liles for BuzzFeed News
The last photos taken of ShyShy.
Even though the local media return to ShyShy’s case every few years — to mark an anniversary or to footnote another missing child’s story — some details have never been told. Like Lamberth’s theory. Like the fact that ShyShy was plagued with illnesses. The identifying scar on her abdomen mentioned on her missing-person alert came from a surgery to treat kidney disease. She had to wear a leg brace because her kneecap was out of place. The week before her disappearance, she was hospitalized with an asthma attack. The last morning Pate saw her daughter, ShyShy was so tired that she asked her mom to carry her on the walk to school. Pate agreed, propping her baby up on her hip. The Tuesday after ShyShy went missing, she had another scheduled doctor’s appointment. She had a bladder leak that caused her to wear pull-ups at age 8, otherwise she’d use the bathroom every 10 to 15 minutes. Doctors were building her a new bladder. If ShyShy wasn’t murdered the night of her kidnapping, as Lamberth believes, not having medical treatment in the months and years following her disappearance could have been what killed her.

But until a body is found, her family will firmly believe ShyShy is alive. They will hold 5Ks for her again (on Sept. 2), even if it costs them — not only money, but immense pain. Pate struggles every September on the anniversary of her daughter's disappearance and every October on ShyShy’s birthday. Up until last year, when her sister organized the 5K and birthday balloon release, Pate traditionally stayed home alone on those days, immobilized by the pain. That pain often clouds ShyShy’s siblings’ birthdays later in the fall and winter. And the holidays are always hard, as is Pate’s own birthday in January. The cloud only really lifts from February to August. Then another year without ShyShy starts anew.

The first year ShyShy was gone, Pate tried to sleep sitting up in a chair next to the unlocked door, waiting. She was terrified to be alone in her house. Now she does OK on her own. What helps the most is the joy she gets from helping raise her grandkids. The first one came in 2001. The ninth came last week.

Veronica Pate outside the home where she and ShyShy lived when ShyShy went missing in 1998.
Kevin D. Liles for BuzzFeed News
Veronica Pate outside the home where she and ShyShy lived when ShyShy went missing in 1998.
But another hard reminder came last year, when three of her granddaughters started the third grade — the same grade ShyShy entered when she went missing. The kids mostly understand that their Aunt ShyShy is missing. They all participated in the 5K, and as they’ve gotten a little older, they’ve stopped questioning their parents’ strictness about not going outside and playing by themselves.

When her now-16-year-old grandson was about 5, he once hid from Pate under a clothes rack at a Walmart. Pate broke down and grabbed him by the shoulders when he eventually came out, shaking him. A woman nearby approached, judging, ready to call the cops. Pate explained what had happened to her family, she said, and the woman understood.

But sometimes Pate is asked to explain to other parents of missing children how she manages. This feels impossible.

“There's no way to tell anybody that it's OK. The only thing I can say is never give up hope. If she ain’t found dead, you just keep on prayin’, keep believing,” she said, her scratchy voice growing scratchier with emotion. You might think it gets easier each year, living without ShyShy — that time heals wounds and all that. You’d be wrong.

“There’s no easin’ no pain,” Pate said. “How can it be this long? How can a person be missing all these years and nobody don’t say nothin’ or she ain’t found?”

Pate, Hickey, and Freeman are waiting in the McDonald's drive-thru line in Pate’s SUV, satisfying one of Hickey’s late-pregnancy cravings on the way from Perry to Unadilla to show me the corner where ShyShy vanished. Pate is running through what she sometimes imagines people think about her — that because she was on welfare and living in the projects and had three other kids already, she didn’t really need to find ShyShy.

“Maybe since I'm poor and I ain’t got a lot, maybe that’s why ain’t nobody lookin' for her, ain’t nobody searchin’ for her. They don’t care,” she said. “Maybe if I had money or I could hire a private investigator and all that, maybe she would’ve been found a long time ago.”

She doesn’t consider, in this scenario, that maybe ShyShy isn’t out there to be found anymore. ●

Jessica Testa is a national reporter for BuzzFeed News and is based in New York.
Contact Jessica Testa at jessica.testa@buzzfeed.com.
Got a confidential tip? Submit it here.

More
News moves fast. Keep up with the BuzzFeed News daily email!

Your email address
Sign up
TOP EVENTS
MLB
View All

PIT 7
DET 5
Final

NYY 0
TOR 4
Final

LAD 8
ARI 6
Final

NFL
View All

MIN 17
BUF 10
Final

JAX 31
NE 24
Final

DEN 24
CHI 17
Final

PHI 9
GB 24
Final

Search SI.com
WATCH PHOTOS PODCASTS VAULT SHOP TICKETS
Search SI.com


MENU
 NFL/MMQB  NCAAF  FANTASY  MLB  NBA  SOCCER  NCAAB  NHL  GOLF  SWIM  MUSTARD  EATS
MLB NEWS  SCORES  SCHEDULE  STANDINGS  STATS  ODDS  TICKETS
NEWS
SCORES
WATCH
PHOTOS
PODCASTS
REPORTERS
LOGIN REGISTER
SHOP
TICKETS
SPORTS
NFL
NBA
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
COLLEGE HOOPS
MLB
SOCCER
NHL
GOLF
MMA
FANTASY SPORTS
TENNIS
RACING
OLYMPICS
BOXING
FEATURES
EXTRA MUSTARD
SWIMSUIT
TECH & MEDIA
EDGE
VAULT
LONGFORM
SPORTSPERSON
EATS
SI NETWORK
FANSIDED
SI KIDS
SI PLAY
120 SPORTS
GOLF.COM TEE TIMES
MLB
The Complicated Life and Death of Hideki Irabu

QUICKLY

Twenty years ago, Hideki Irabu arrived in the United States hoping to find glory in pinstripes. He found heartache instead.
SHARE
BEN REITER
Tuesday August 1st, 2017
This story appears in the Aug. 7, 2017, edition of SPORTS ILLUSTRATED. Subscribe to the magazine here.

No one had noticed anybody come or go for days when, just after 4 p.m. on Wednesday, July 27, 2011, a man emerged from a tidy three-bedroom house near the end of a cul-de-sac in Rancho Palos Verdes, Calif. His screams pierced the suburban idyll of the affluent neighborhood, with its hilltop homes and panoramic views up toward Los Angeles and out over the Pacific. Deputies from the L.A. County sheriff’s department arrived quickly. In one of the bedrooms, they found the friend the man had come to check on.

He was wearing a white T-shirt and dark shorts. His body, which a coroner measured at 6' 5" and 236 pounds, hung suspended from a half-inch-thick white rope. Judging by the state of him, he had died several days before—perhaps on Sunday, the last time he was known to be alive. He left no note for his wife and two young daughters, and though his computer was set to Japanese, a deputy determined that no document had been recently created. No one suspected foul play. “The manner of death is suicide,” concluded the autopsy report, filed two mornings later. Fourteen Julys after he had debuted on the mound at Yankee Stadium in front of 52,000 fans, and nine years after he’d thrown the last pitch of a major league career that had tailspinned from promising to punch line, Hideki Irabu, 42 years old, had died desperately alone.

The tabloids that had feasted on his many missteps gobbled up the news. In Anchorage, a 76-year-old Navy and Air Force veteran named Steve Thompson received a phone call. Thompson wasn’t a sharer; he had spent much of his life guarding a secret he thought he would never reveal. He didn’t tell his wife, Nit, why his face was ashen when he put down the phone. He didn’t say anything. Instead he walked to his covered porch, sat down in a chair and, for the next several hours, cried by himself.

Those who were close to Irabu, and there weren’t many of them, were remorseful about his death. They wondered what more they might have done to keep him from the end of that rope. No one, though, felt guiltier than Steve Thompson.

They called him Schwarzenegger for his imposing physique and “the Japanese Nolan Ryan” for his record-setting 99-mph fastballs. But the nickname that would stick to Hideki Irabu was uttered by George Steinbrenner in a fit of pique at the end of spring training in 1999: the Fat Pus-sy Toad. “Rhymes with fussy,” the New York Post always helpfully noted of the sobriquet that would define Irabu’s reputation.

His 1997 arrival in New York City—after a monthslong dispute over his right to leave the Chiba Lotte Marines and join his chosen MLB team—had been so auspicious. On July 9, after he signed a four-year, $12.8 million contract, Mayor Rudy Giuliani caught a pitch from Irabu on the steps of City Hall and presented him with a Tiffany crystal apple. The next day the righthander struck out nine Tigers over 6 2⁄3 innings.

Tasked with charting Irabu’s pitches from the dugout, rotation mate David Cone was enthralled. “There were so many different velocities—87, 89, 84, 95, 97,” Cone recalls. “He was a big guy, strong, and you’d heard about the power—but it wasn’t all power. He seemed to have finesse as well.” Giuliani never missed a chance to attach himself to the Yankees’ successes, which he did the following Sunday in his weekly radio address. “Hideki, like the millions of others over the last century, wanted to live the American dream in the greatest American city,” he said.

It wasn’t long before the dream began to sour. Irabu allowed five earned runs in his next outing, then six, then five. After a stint in the minors, he returned to finish his first season with an ERA of 7.09, having yielded an astonishing 2.5 homers per nine innings.

By 1998 many had written him off as a surly, out-of-shape bust. “How could you give 12 million dollars to Hideki Irabu?” screamed Frank Costanza at the Steinbrenner character in the series finale of Seinfeld, which aired in May of that year. Derogatory details about Irabu’s personal habits leaked into the papers. He smoked cigarettes after every half inning of every start. He went on drinking binges. He ordered at a sushi bar by waving his arm over the fish on display, to indicate: all of it. And he did himself no favors with the press. He was short with American reporters and disdainful of the Japanese corps, which he called kingyo no fun (goldfish s---) for the way it trailed him in a long line. In March ’98, during spring training, he demanded a Tokyo Broadcasting System cameraman’s videotape, that had captured what Irabu intended to be an off-the-record conversation, and stomped on it. He was already widely viewed as wagamama (selfish) because of the way he had forced his way out of Japanese baseball, and the reports sent back home did little to enhance his standing.

If Steinbrenner’s lasting insult, issued after Irabu had failed to cover first base in an exhibition game, augured the end of his Yankees tenure, Irabu didn’t formally leave until eight months later, following the only postseason appearance he would ever make. When Roger Clemens turned in an uncharacteristically poor outing against the Red Sox in Game 3 of the 1999 ALCS, manager Joe Torre turned to the last man on his staff to mop up. By the bottom of the sixth the score had ballooned to 9–0, and Irabu stormed into the Fenway Park clubhouse, firing his spikes into his locker and flinging his belt across the room. Then, half-undressed, something occurred to him.

“George,” he said to his translator, George Rose, “did the manager take me out of the game?”

Irabu ran back through the tunnel to the dugout, pulling on his uniform pants as he went, to find New York’s infielders warming up—and no one on the mound. He gave up four more runs that inning. In the end he completed 4 2⁄3 innings, yielding eight runs on 13 hits. It was the last time his name would ever appear in a Yankees’ box score and, to many, a fittingly buffoonish conclusion.

To his teammates, it wasn’t fitting at all. “He was an asset on our staff,” says Cone. “The day he pitched, we thought, Wow, if he’s on, he’s going to win the game for us. He could dominate an opposing lineup. That’s the way we saw him.” In fact, he had several tantalizing runs of brilliance in New York. He was named the AL pitcher of the month in May 1998, when he went 4–1 with a 1.44 ERA, and again in July ’99, when he went 4–0 with a 2.64. Despite his inconsistency, the sum of his performance over those two seasons was nothing disastrous: 342 innings in which he pitched to a 4.44 ERA during the height of the steroid era, with an ERA+ of 103, which pegs him as just above average.

Steinbrenner, though, didn’t pay him $12 million for just above average, nor did Giuliani hand him a crystal apple for just above average, nor did Yankees fans applaud him for just above average. As it turned out, there were many things about the failed ace that none of them grasped.

By 1968, the Chicago-born, Oregon-raised Steve Thompson had spent nearly half his 33 years in the armed forces, and he was then an Air Force meteorologist stationed on Okinawa. He met a young waitress at a restaurant frequented by GIs on the island, and though they could not speak each other’s language—and though Thompson had a wife back at home—they began dating. Her name was Kazue. The next year, after Thompson had been deployed to Vietnam, he received a letter informing him that Kazue had given birth to their son in May.

Thompson returned to Okinawa in 1970, and marveled at the infant’s size and heft. He thought Hideki took after his own father, an imposing athlete who had tried out for the Red Sox several times. He went back to Vietnam, promising to return to Kazue and the only child he would ever have. He never did.

Japan can be a difficult place to be different, especially in the 1970s Osaka, where Kazue settled after marrying a restaurateur. While his mother never told him his father’s name, Irabu grew up knowing that he had been a white American serviceman. That was no secret in his home country. He was larger than the other kids. His hair was browner and his eyes were rounder. He was a target for bullies.

Baseball gave him an identity. As an adult he would often tell friends that if not for his extraordinary talent, he would have ended up in the yakuza—the mafia—which always found a way to use large, lost young men. Baseball saved my life, he’d say.

MLB
Yankees, Dodgers Win Big on Deadline Day, Making Dream World Series Matchup a Real Possibility
By 1997, when he was 28, Irabu was the most intimidating pitcher in the Japanese league. Then he found a greater purpose: the pursuit of freedom, specifically from the draconian reserve clause under which Japanese teams controlled their players’ rights for 10 years, allowing Chiba Lotte to sell his contract to the Padres without giving him any say in the matter. As agent Don Nomura and a lawyer in his office named Jean Afterman fought for him—with the help of the MLB players’ union—they realized that Irabu wasn’t just campaigning for himself. Nor did he view his victory, which came in April when the Yankees sent two prospects and $3 million to the Padres for his negotiating rights, as his alone. “He felt very, very aware that if he didn’t make a stand, then other Japanese ballplayers would be forced to go through what he went through,” says Afterman, who for the past 16 years has served as the assistant GM to the Yankees’ Brian Cashman. “I think he found his cause.”

Irabu opened himself up to Nomura and Afterman in a way he did with few others. He’d sit in Afterman’s office in Los Angeles every day that spring, chain-smoking and chatting and waiting for news. “He was fascinated by life,” she says. “He was a kid philosophy major. He had a lot of questions about life. He had a lot of curiosity. He had a lot of, as we would say in this country, things to work out.”

George Rose learned that about him too. Not long after graduating from Holy Cross, Rose, an English major, had sought adventure by taking a job teaching in an exchange program in the coastal Japanese town of Fukushima. Nine years later, just before he was to begin his final semester at Columbia Business School in the spring of 1998, he applied to be Irabu’s translator. He got the gig and put business school on hold.

Rose found himself thrust into an intimate sort of relationship with Irabu, whom he found to be much deeper than his reputation had suggested. “He never seemed comfortable—like he was always looking for who he was meant to be,” says Rose.

That restlessness revealed itself in many ways, including some that thwarted any chance of consistency on the mound. He would constantly change things up: adopting and discarding exercise routines, pasting tiny magnets to his scalp to regulate his body’s blood flow and, perhaps most damagingly, continually tweaking his mechanics. “He was always questioning himself,” says Nomura. “Even when he had a great outing, he’d suspect that the next time they were going to start reading his pitches, so he had to change something.”

Irabu’s battles with the Japanese media made sense to Nomura, even as he kept having to fly in, at Cashman’s request, to put out fires. For someone without a strong sense of who he was, it was a daily agony to have to answer questions about himself—particularly as Irabu’s interrogators represented a home country where he was never fully accepted.

Irabu eventually sensed that he would never feel accepted in the U.S., either. Even with Rose’s steady help, the language remained an insurmountable barrier, as it always would. Despite the efforts of teammates like Cone and David Wells, a real connection with them remained out of his grasp. The two fellow starters would often ask Irabu and Rose out to dinner on the road, which is generally where baseball teammates bond. Once, after a few drinks in the John Hancock Center in Chicago, Cone and Wells began to needle Irabu in what they thought was a good-natured way—the same way they needled each other—about his toughness, about how he needed to scuffle through when things weren’t going well on the mound. Irabu stood up in the middle of the restaurant and ripped off his shirt, its buttons flying across the floor. “It was explosive,” recalls Cone. “It was like he snapped.” There was no more needling after that.

Irabu increasingly looked to a higher power. “He was a real spiritual seeker,” says Rose. “He had a relentless inquisitiveness. We’d talk for hours about what I believed—about Catholicism and Christianity—and what he believed.” He had once injured his back in high school, and he found a Buddhist monk on the Japanese island of Shikoku to pray for it to heal. It did, and thereafter Irabu viewed the man as his spiritual adviser. Under the monk’s direction, Irabu came to believe that he had a personal dragon who watched over him, and who appeared in his dreams. While tattoos were rare in Japan, he had a large image of his dragon inked onto his back. When he slumped, he would call the man for guidance as many as 35 times a day.

Of course, those who were close to him could sense what Irabu was really seeking. He referred to Rose, just three year his senior, as senpai—elder—and after the 1998 season Irabu gave him $50,000 from his World Series bonus to pay off his business school loans. He’d have terrible fights with Nomura, when the agent would reprimand him for his latest contretemps, but he always apologized. Nomura was also the Japan-raised son of a white American father, and Irabu knew that no one could better understand him; at dinners with Nomura, Irabu would order only water and a small salad, so as not to disappoint him with his appetites. Even Steinbrenner filled a fatherly role at times. For the Boss’s birthday in July 1999, Irabu sent him a gift intended to signal his forgiveness for Steinbrenner’s famous insult. It was a large mechanical toad that, with the press of a button, unleashed a loud ribbit. Steinbrenner kept it in his office for the rest of his life.

Still, Irabu’s biological father was out there somewhere. In his later years Irabu told at least one friend that one of the reasons he insisted on playing for the Yankees—not San Diego—was that if he became a star for America’s greatest team, then his father would have to come find him. The week after his Yankees debut, The New York Times revealed to American readers that Irabu’s father was a white GI—and a few dozen pretenders presented themselves over his first two seasons in New York. One even sent Nomura blood and hair samples. Finally, during spring training in 1999, Steve Thompson passed a note to Rose. Hideki called Kazue. Yes, she said. That’s your father.

Thompson had divorced his first wife in 1993 and later that year married Nit, a Thai immigrant who worked with him at Nellis Air Force Base in Las Vegas. “He loved kids, and he loved to take pictures of his friends’ kids playing sports,” Nit says. The photos were so good that sometimes his friends would offer to pay for them, but he’d give them prints for free. He buried his secret about his own son ever deeper within himself, never revealing it to anyone, not even Nit.

After the details of Irabu’s origins became widely known, Nit could tell that her husband was keeping something from her. “I’d ask him all the time—what’s wrong with you?” she says. “He’d sit and be quiet a lot. Sometimes he’d stare at the wall.” Finally, after more than a year, he broke down and revealed what had consumed him with guilt for three decades. Nit was shocked, but she encouraged him to go to spring training to meet his son. “I just don’t want him thinking I want something from him,” Thompson said.

Thompson, by then retired from the civil service, flew from the couple’s home in Anchorage, where they had relocated in 1994, to Tampa, to pass his note to Rose. To his surprise, Irabu agreed to see him—but to Irabu’s surprise, Rose recalls, Thompson looked little like the man he had long imagined. Irabu had assumed that his size had come from his father, but Thompson was just 5' 11" and 200 pounds.

During a few meals over the course of a few days, with Rose translating, they found similarities. Thompson, like Irabu, could be stubborn and hardheaded when he was young. They had the same slightly hunched, shoulder-forward posture. They both chain-smoked. Thompson spoke of his own baseball-playing father, who shared a birthday with Irabu, May 5. He also explained that after he returned to the U.S. from Vietnam, he had suffered from severe PTSD, which manifested itself in alcoholism. By the time he recovered and tried to contact Kazue, his letters never reached her; she and her son had moved.

Irabu seemed to accept Thompson’s explanation. It was, in all, a peaceful visit. But there wouldn’t be many more. While Thompson saw Irabu’s wife, Kyonsu, and then his two granddaughters over the years to come, he rarely saw Irabu again. They couldn’t speak the same language, and too much time had elapsed, too much life had happened. Irabu realized that just as Thompson didn’t want anything from him, he didn’t want anything from Thompson.

Irabu’s baseball life had a long, if quiet, tail: two uninspiring years with the Expos in 2000 and ’01, one more as a reliever with the Rangers in ’02, a stirring comeback with the NPB’s Hanshin Tigers in ’03 and then, in ’09, stints with independent-league teams in both California and Japan. He couldn’t give it up, until it gave him up. Then the man who once had many interests could focus on only one. “The only thing he ever talked about was baseball—not women, not love, not money,” says a friend from his later years.

MLB
MLB Trade Deadline Winners (Yankees, Dodgers) and Losers (Red Sox, Mets)
He dabbled in business, opening and closing a couple of noodle shops in Southern California. A year before he died, Cone and Wells reconnected with him at a baseball card show in New Jersey that brought together members of the Yankees’ 1998 championship team. “He talked to us about some business ventures he was trying to get going,” says Cone. “He had access to samurai warrior swords and armor, and he was trying to import them from Japan to sell them. He had things he was talking about doing, but it never really came together.”

Meanwhile, his family life was being washed away in a deluge of alcohol, as was any future in baseball. Without the sport’s structure, his periodic binge drinking became consistent. In 2008 he was arrested for assaulting a bartender during a visit to Osaka, and he was booked for a DUI in California in May 2010. After those incidents, no club on either side of the Pacific would hire him, even as an unpaid coach. By July 2011, Kyonsu, whom he had wed in ’97, had left their house in Rancho Palos Verdes and taken their daughters with her.

"I don’t know what to do with my day anymore,” he had told Rose, who finished business school and later returned to the Yankees to coordinate their Pacific Rim operations, in 2010. “Get up, watch TV, smoke cigarettes, have coffee.” Even his pioneering labor fight, which led directly to the modern posting system that gives Japanese players at least some say in their destination, seemed to have been largely forgotten.

In the last year of his life, Irabu’s few remaining friends suspected that he was heavily medicated. The light had gone out of his eyes, they say. A rec-league teammate told police that Irabu had been despondent at a practice four days before his death—“I don’t want to live anymore,” he’d said—and he hadn’t been seen since the day after that. But no one thought to check on him until it was far too late.

The L.A. Sheriff Department’s search of his residence turned up one half-empty bottle of Paroxetine, the antidepressant known as Paxil, and two of the powerful benzodiazepine Lorazepam, an anxiety drug usually sold as Ativan. Ativan, in rare cases, has been associated with an increased suicide risk, especially for those with depressive tendencies, and the drug should not be taken with alcohol. Irabu’s toxicology report indicated that his postmortem blood alcohol content was 0.23%, nearly three times the legal driving limit in California, and also that Lorazepam was detected in his liver.

Still, it is careless to conclude that combination is why Irabu died, just as it is to sum up a man’s character in three words from an enraged sports team owner. Tragedies are never so simple. “He felt uncomfortable being in Japan, and he felt uncomfortable being in the United States,” says Nomura. “There wasn’t a home for him. It’s almost like he was always at the visitors’ ballpark.”

After Irabu’s death it was that way for Thompson, too. “He was quieter,” says his wife, Nit. “He kept talking about how he wanted to die. I’d say, If you die, who can I fight with?” In 2012 he was diagnosed with lung cancer, likely the result of a lifetime of two to three packs a day. He died in July 2016, at 81. He’s buried at Fort Richardson, in Anchorage, some 3,500 miles from Irabu’s ashes, which are kept in a small temple outside Tokyo.

Nit still has a photo album Steve made 18 years ago. It’s filled with pictures he took of his son, playing baseball.

TAGS
hideki irabu  new york yankees
MORE MLB

MLB
Yankees, Mets beef intensifies over failed trades
MLB
WATCH: Giancarlo Stanton crushes 39th home run of season
MLB
Immaculate Innings are the Best Thing
MLB
Mike Trout is a virtual lock for the Hall of Fame at age 26
MLB
What are the Mets doing after trading Bruce to Indians?
MLB
Watch: Rally Cat helps Cardinals get late lead
MLB
Watch: Rick Porcello pitches immaculate inning
SI Apps
WE'VE GOT APPS TOO
Get expert analysis, unrivaled access, and the award-winning storytelling only SI can provide—from Peter King, Tom Verducci, Lee Jenkins, Andy Staples, Grant Wahl, and more—delivered straight to you, along with up-to-the-minute news and live scores.
App Store Google Play
Easy to Read
A clean presentation that helps you get everything you need to be in the know.
Personalized
Find the stories and scores that matter most to you.
Fast
Get lightning-fast scoring alerts as they happen.
Contact Subscribe SI Cover Store Customer Service Site Map Advertising Privacy Policy Your California Privacy Rights Terms of Use Ad Choices
© 2017 Time Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Joni Mitchell
HOME NEWS MUSIC LIBRARY CHRONOLOGY PAINTINGS BIOGRAPHY NETWORK
ARTICLES BOOKS & DVDS VIDEOS CULTURAL REFERENCES COPYRIGHT NOTICE

SEARCH SITE
  Perform search
more options & shortcuts »
Register/Log in

Library of Articles
LIBRARY: ARTICLES

SEARCH ARTICLES
  Search articles
The Life and Death of Jaco Pastorius Print-ready version

by Joni Mitchell
Musician Magazine
December 1987


What can I say about Jaco? When I first met him he was extremely present tense and, I would have to say for lack of a better term, extremely sage. He was so accepting of everything going on around him; at the same time he was arrogant and challenging: "I'm the baddest!" He was so alert, so involved in the moment. When people are in that state they're generally fun to be with. He was very alive.

The first time he came in, I had never heard him play. I forget who recommended him. Everybody'd heard my lament about the trouble I was having. I was trying to find a certain sound on the bottom end, going against the vogue at the time. It's very difficult to buck a vogue. Bass players were playing with dead strings; you couldn't get them to change to get a round, full-bodied tone. I liked that old analog, jukebox, Fifties sound-up-right bass, boomier. In the Sixties and early Seventies you had this dead, distant bass sound. I didn't care for it. And the other thing was, I had started to think, "Why couldn't the bass leave the bottom sometimes and go up and play in the midrange and then return?" Why did it have to always play the root? On "The Jungle Line" I had played some kind of keyboard bass line, and when it came around to Max Bennett having to play it, he just hated it. Because sometimes it didn't root the chord, it went up into the middle. To him that was flat-out wrong. To some people it was eccentric. So when Jaco came in, John Guerin said to me, "God, you must love this guy; he almost never plays the root!"

There was a time when Jaco and I first worked together when there was nobody I'd rather hang with than him. There was an appreciation, a joie de vivre, a spontaneity. A lot of people couldn't take him. Maybe that's my peculiarity, but then, I also have a fondness for derelicts.

He had this wide, fat swath of a sound. There weren't a lot of gizmos you could put your instrument through then, and the night I got my Roland Jazz Chorus amp, it was sort of a prototype. Jaco and Bobbye Hall and I were playing a benefit up in San Francisco. I tried playing through this thing and Jaco flipped for it. So he stole it off me! He said, "Oh yeah, I'm playing through that tonight!" I said, "What are you talking about? This is my new amp!" He pointed to his rental amp and said, "I'm not playing through that piece of shit." So he took mine! We went out onstage that night and Jaco got this huge wonderful busy sound and I played through this peanut. He was formidable! You can hear it in the mixes back then. He was very dominating. But I put up with it; I even got a kick out of it. Because I was so thrilled about the way he played. It was exactly what I was waiting for.

He was an innovator. First of all, he was changing the bottom end of the time, and he knew it. With that went a certain amount of confidence, which at its worst was offensive to some people. It didn't offend me. His drug problem hadn't begun. You take a big flaming juicy ego like that and add drugs to it-it's no good. I mean, Freud thought he'd made great breakthroughs treating inferiority complexes with cocaine. Imagine what it does to add that to someone who's already Mr. Confidence!

I know he stretched me. I stretched him some too, inadvertently, on things like "Don Juan's Reckless Daughter." That was Alexandro Acuna, Don Alias, myself and Jaco. Alex's background is in Latin music, so that track was getting a very Latin percussion sound on the bottom. I said, "No , this is more North American Indian, a more limited palette of drum sounds." So Jaco got an idea. I don't know if he detuned his bass, but he started striking the end of the strings, up by the bridge, and he'd slide with the palm of his palm all the way down to the head. He set up this pattern: du du du doom, du du du doom. Well, it's a five minute song, and three minutes into it his hand started to bleed. He shredded it making it slide the full length of his bass strings. They turned into a grater. So we stopped tapping and he changed to his Venus mound, below the thumb. And when we finished the take, that was bleeding, too. So his whole hand was bleeding. But the music was magnificent, and he was so excited because he'd discovered a new thing. Later he built up calluses and you'd always see him doing those slides. But then he was mad with me because I had copped his new shit for my record! I think he might have had a different pain threshold.

Jaco was a self-proclaimed mutt. He had so many different bloodlines running through him. But one of them was Irish and I always felt that was fairly evident. Maybe it was an Irish spirit that the best of our communication went out on. Jaco, you know, was a gerner. A gerner is a funny-face maker. They have competitions in England. They pull their lips over their noses. A lot of the best gerners have no teeth-they can collapse their whole face. It's a folk art, and in rural places like the north of England, maybe Wales, they have contests where these hideous contortions are adjudicated. And Jaco was a master at it. He did all sorts of obscene things with his face. He'd say, "Do you want to see me make my face like a woman's pussy?" I swear! I don't know if I want to say this & but he'd do it. He'd turn his mouth so it went sideways, pull his lips into obscene shapes and I'd say, "Oh my God!" He was so much fun to be with.

He loved his kids; he was really good with kids and animals. Jaco was a great spirit before his deterioration by toxics. He'd come to L.A. to make his fortune, and spent a lot of time away from home. Once his wife called to say his child was mad with him because he never came home. Jaco said, "That's good, that's good, it shows the kid is thinking!" He had such a positive attitude about certain things. It was detached in a certain way, but not without warmth. I thought he had wonderful eyes before drugs clouded them. Look at that portrait of him on his first album cover and see if he doesn't look like some Tibetan sage.

He'd say, "I'm the baddest. I'm not braggin', I'm just telling the truth!" And I'd give him that. As far as I was concerned, he was telling the truth. It didn't even seem inappropriate to me that he knew it. But in order to keep the beauty of that bravado, you have to be able to back it up. And when his talent and inspiration began to be corroded by the clouding over of perception that accompanies overindulgence in drugs and alcohol, he became a tragic figure on the scene. Anyone who's that arrogant going up, people love to carve up going down. Therein lies the tragedy.

He started to get unruly, but I could deal with that. On Don Juan's Reckless Daughter there was a date where Henry Lewy and I waited for him. He was a hired hand coming in to play on a session, and he didn't show up. I thought I knew where we could find him. So when he was about two hours late I said, "Come on, Henry, we're going to go and get him." Sure enough, he and Wayne Shorter and Joe Zawinul and Peter Erskine, the drummer who had just joined Weather Report, were rehearsing for a tour. Wayne was up on the stage noodling around with the piano, and down on the floor were Jaco and Zawinul playing Frisbee. The two of them reminded me of European circus people: Zawinul and his straight back and shoulders like an Austrian tightrope walker, so proud, and Jaco had that same kind of command-he'd jump over the speakers; there were a lot of circus aspects to his performance. So here they were tossing this Frisbee around, Jaco catching it just like a circus act. "Ta-daa!" You could hear the trumpet fanfare. Then they threw it to Peter Erskine. Now, Peter was the new guy in the band. Boy, that thing was coming toward him and there was panic in his eyes. He caught it in kind of a wobbly way, and he wobbled it back to Zawinul. And they looked at him kind of like, "Not the Flying Wallichi Brothers." They tossed it a few more rounds and then they tossed it to Wayne. Now, this was an insight into Wayne. Here was a Frisbee coming at him in his peripheral vision-he had both hands on the keyboards-and just at the perfect moment Wayne reached out his left hand, caught it and threw it back to them. He never turned his head, and he only took one hand off the keyboards.

When Jaco and I played one-on-one in the studio, it was a different thing. On Mingus there's a duet that we did, "God Must Be a Boogie Man." I heard that the other day and I thought, "God, I don't know how he hung in there with me!" I let a long time go by between notes. I'd go bomp and he'd catch it with me! There'd be a lot of space. It wasn't like there was a band or somebody keeping metered time. I thought, "How did he do that?" Then I remembered, he used to watch my foot. My right foot would be keeping the steady time.

The Shadows and Light tour worked out fine, but it didn't look like it was going to. Jaco was musical director, and he didn't show up until we'd already been in rehearsal for about two weeks. When he did show up, he decided he didn't like the band. As we'd been rehearsing without a bass player, we'd kind of fleshed it in to where it sounded pretty good even without a bass. So when Jaco came, he started tearing the arrangements apart, demanding more space onstage. He later came to love everybody, but he didn't hear it that way initially. He didn't like Don Alias on drum kit, he liked him on hand drums. Well, I really liked the feel of Don's playing-he's not a technical virtuoso on the kit like he is on congas and other drums, where he's in the top three in the world, but he such a good-feeling kit player to me. So we had this big argument and it didn't look like the thing was going to fly. As the tour rolled along, the tension dissolved-as a matter of fact, he took that band and played with them on his own record.

I think he played very well on that tour, especially, oddly enough, the day we filmed. Something personal had happened to him that day. I don't know what. Something between his wife and his mother, some family thing. He was in the midst of some tempering revelation. When we started the first few notes he played were from "I Was High and Mighty." For a minute I thought, "I can't believe it! I'm watching Jaco have a humble attack! It's not really good for him to be this humble. Come on, Jaco, be a little arrogant!" Toward the end he took off, but he used to jump over his amp and beat his bass with his strap every night on that tour-this was the one night he didn't do it. It was a shame because Mike Brecker and I had cooked it up that when he jumped over the speakers and beat his bass, Mike was going to jump out and beat his saxophone. We were going to have a real donnybrook up there. I thought, "Maybe I'll come out and beat the piano." But he didn't do it.

There wasn't any real parting point between us; we stopped playing together because Jaco didn't play well anymore. Then I lost contact with him. It was more of a drifting apart than a breaking off. He went off with Weather Report and they played Japan and I heard tales of him jumping into fountains naked, going amok in the Orient. I just didn't see him that much.

I think he had a beautiful animal wisdom that I don't see as a madness at all. It's something that we lost. You could view it in this time as madness, and certainly it could be seen as a madness. Maybe I have the same madness but it's not so expressed. In Jaco I saw some of those expressions as a celebration of life. Strange behavior, certainly. But I love animals, and Jaco loved animals. To run down the street taking off his clothes was different if he did it from if you did it. I don't think of it as demented. I know he lost it at the end; you couldn't talk to him. It was tragic. And coke inflamed his mean side. Coke shuts off the heart and allows meanness or anything that's lying there-a cruel wit-to develop. We all have it. In whatever form, it's lying there.

I saw him for the last time in New York a couple of years ago. I went to an art opening with a group of people. We came out and were looking for a place to eat. We saw this little restaurant across the street with a hand-painted sign: JACO PASTORIUS TONIGHT. So I went across to see him. We all walked in and he was sitting at the bar. I went up and tapped him. When he turned his face to me he was just . . . gone. It was a gone face. He hugged me like he was drowning. Then he switched into this gear: he started yelling my name around the club. "Joni Mitchell is the baddest! She's the only woman this, she's the only woman that." Until it was embarrassing. Everyone there was embarrassed. The room was embarrassed, I was embarrassed. He kept hollering my name. It was a very small club, there were maybe ten people present. Anyway, we ended up jamming for a minute. I just got up and started improvising on this electric piano. There was a vocal mike on it, with a cord draped along the back of the piano. At one point Jaco moved forward and he short-sheeted me for a joke; he pulled the cord down so it ran along the keyboard from the middle C down, an obstacle course. In trying to move it back up, I inevitably hit a clunker and somebody in the audience yelled out, "Never mind the mistakes, Joni." Jaco was laughing. So I just stopped and said, "Look, this isn't going to work. I'm just going to let Jaco play and I'll sing to him." So I grabbed the mike and let him take the lead. He'd used to play "out," but there's out and then there's out. This was not good. It was frustrating. It was heartbreaking. And so I just let him play and I followed him and sang with him. That way, no matter where he went I could try and be supportive. But he was not in the mood to be supportive. That particular evening, he was a saboteur.

The day after Jaco died I went back and listened to Mingus. I went back, basically, to reminisce. And gee, there was some beautiful communication in that playing. I hadn't listened to it for years. The grace of the improvisation on that record-there's space, and then one voice comes in. It's not three people grabbing, feeling a pressure point coming up and all landing on it at once. Jaco was not a road hog at that point. When you put him in that chemistry with Herbie and Wayne, I think they all played splendidly. "Courtesy" sounds so formal, but it was the best of musical manners. And the voices they speak in when they do come in! I thought that was some really good playing. And there were a lot of magic evenings like that.


Copyright protected material on this website is used in accordance with 'Fair Use', for the purpose of study, review or critical analysis, and will be removed at the request of the copyright owner(s). Please read Notice and Procedure for Making Claims of Copyright Infringement.

Comments on The Life and Death of Jaco Pastorius
Comment using your Facebook profile, or by registering at this site.
You must be registered and log in to add a permanently indexed comment.
Facebook comments

JoniMitchell.com
Register / Login

Translate this page:


由 Google 翻译翻译强力驱动
Contact Us
Copyright Permissions
Copyright Claims
Consider a Donation
Credits
JMDL
Follow JoniMitchell.com

Facebook  Twitter
MAKE A DONATION

Website Design by
Raffaele Malanga at Far Studios
CSS and HTML wizardry by
Els van Bloois
Extra bandwidth courtesy of
Kanchan Maharaj at InHerEye Photography
Programming by
FrontRange360

Right: "She was unique, beautiful, smart," says Michael Strauss, recalling the woman who briefly was his wife. Left: Angelyne in 1986, near the start of her fame.
Right: "She was unique, beautiful, smart," says Michael Strauss, recalling the woman who briefly was his wife. Left: Angelyne in 1986, near the start of her fame.
Michael Ochs Archives/Moviepix/Getty Images (Background); Courtesy of Michael Strauss (Photo)
The Mystery of L.A. Billboard Diva Angelyne's Real Identity Is Finally Solved
by Gary Baum  August 02, 2017, 11:00am PDT
 Share on Facebook   Share on Twitter
Way before Paris Hilton and Kim Kardashian, the enigmatic blonde bombshell was famous for being famous, perpetually driving the streets of Hollywood in that pink Corvette. But her true identity has remained secret all these years … until now.
"Would you be interested in a story on Angelyne's true identity?" the man wrote last fall under a pseudonym, referring to the enigmatic L.A. billboard diva who has been a pop culture icon of self-creation and self-marketing since the early 1980s — and is now regarded as a forerunner to Paris Hilton, Kim Kardashian and every personal-brand hustler on social media. "I have many details on her life — all well documented — from when her parents met to early adulthood. It's very different from her public, concocted story — and more interesting."
Angelyne is one of the vanishingly few contemporary public figures whose background has remained shrouded in mystery, along with the conceptual artist Banksy, Bitcoin founder Satoshi Nakamoto and aircraft hijacker D.B. Cooper. The man, who claimed to work in an undefined role for the federal government, said he was a hobbyist genealogist, occasionally taking on paid assignments in the field as an amusing side gig. A few years earlier, he'd decided it'd be fun to set himself the challenge of cracking Angelyne's case. "And I did," he explained.

Later, at the 101 Coffee Shop in Hollywood, the genealogist — who looks like Michael Kelly's contained political operative Doug Stamper from House of Cards — unfurled an elaborate story of Angelyne's past, based on material he contended he'd enterprisingly pulled and synthesized from a global network of public databases. He laid down a folded printout of a row of yearbook photos.

"This one," he said, pointing at a 1967 Monroe Senior High School sophomore from the San Fernando Valley, third from right, "is Angelyne." A schoolgirl with hooded eyes and long center-parted locks, in a button-down white shirt and tie, stared out across half a century. "Also known as Renee Goldberg."

The Hollywood Reporter has since independently confirmed this is Angelyne's real identity with public records and family members. Far from the archetypal transplant-with-a-dream, as she has tacitly long alluded, she's the locally raised daughter of Holocaust survivors, a Jew who has found refuge in shiksa drag. It's a fascinating, only-in-L.A. story of identity, history and a symbiotic yearning both to be forgotten and to be famous.

•••

The yearbook photo was no smoking gun. By her own cosmetic surgery confessions, Angelyne has had quite a bit of work done — and if the genealogist was right, that high school junior is now 66 years old.

Copies of immigration, marriage and death records pointed to a cloaked prehistory of Renee Tami Goldberg (originally Ronia Tamar Goldberg), which seems to reveal the trauma Angelyne had both emerged and escaped from. She was born in Poland on Oct. 2, 1950, the daughter of Polish Jews who'd met in the Chmielnik ghetto during World War II — they were among 500 to survive out of a population of 13,000, the rest sent to death at Treblinka. According to the documentation — obtained from the International Tracing Service, established by the Red Cross as an archive of Nazi crimes — her parents, Hendrik (aka Heniek or Henryk) Goldberg and Bronia (aka Bronis) Zernicka, endured unimaginable horrors at a series of concentration camps, first together at Skarzysko, where prisoners' main job was to make munitions, and then apart at the 20th century's most infamous hellscapes, including Buchenwald and Bergen-Belsen.

Bronia later submitted paperwork to Yad Vashem indicating she'd lost more than 40 relatives in the Holocaust, including her father, three brothers and a sister. Shortly after liberation, she and Hendrik married in the Foehrenwald displaced persons camp in Germany. They were eventually repatriated to Poland, which remained hostile to Jews after World War II. So after Goldberg's birth, the family immigrated to Israel, remaining in an ultra-orthodox community of Hasidic Jews called Bnei Brak, east of Tel Aviv, until 1959. (A younger sister, Annette, was born in 1954.)

They boarded a ship leaving Haifa for New York and settled in L.A.'s Fairfax District. Her father worked as a tool-and-die mechanic. Then, in 1965, her 44-year-old mother died of cancer. Goldberg was 14.

The next year Hendrik (now Henry) remarried another Holocaust survivor, a seamstress divorcee named Deborah, and Goldberg acquired a younger stepsister, Norma. She and her father moved from the Westside to Panorama City, deep in the San Fernando Valley, where she'd begin high school and Henry and Deborah would run a strip-mall liquor store in nearby Van Nuys. She'd have a brief marriage to the son of a Beverly Hills executive, living in Hollywood with him. Goldberg's paper trail ends with their divorce in 1969.

•••

Angelyne had single-handedly created and then inhabited a modern myth of L.A.: the platinum blond bombshell in the bright pink Corvette forever circumnavigating the city, seeking to enchant by dint of her sheer superficial glamour. It had the aesthetic power and emotional resonance of genuine performance art, Marina Abramovic by way of John Waters, particularly as she kept on rambling around the city over the decades while she aged.

I'd written a profile about Angelyne for THR in 2015. She attempted to micromanage the terms of our time together in sharp-elbowed fashion before agreeing to let me ride in her Stingray 1LT. Once inside, reality quickly shone through her constructed shallow facade: a keen intelligence, a striking vulnerability. Also something else, undefinable but perceptibly troubled, even haunted.

When I asked about her family and her past, she described herself as an only child and an orphan. "I lost my parents at a young age," she said, "and because of that, I sought the attention of the world through my tricks. I said, 'Well, I'm going to get the love of the world.' " When I pushed for more, she shut me down. "It's just a long story," she said, the cartoonishly girly lilt of her voice gone flat. "I don't want to get into it. I made my way here."

Angelyne was similarly mum or vague when I inquired about other things that might have forged her, from religion ("I've tried them all — Jewish, Catholic, Hindu: too many dogmas") to her place of origin. Some internet stories suggest that she is from Idaho, but she wouldn't talk about where she grew up. A distant hometown perfectly fit her narrative of an American small-town girl coming to L.A. to fulfill a dream. (I searched Idaho public records and could find no indication of someone named Angelyne, Angelyne Lyne or Angelyne Lynne — all names that have appeared on her business filings.)

I came away with an understanding of how she'd built and perpetuated the Angelyne phenomenon — including the business by which she made a living: lucratively marked-up and vigorously hawked merchandise sales out of her trunk, plus licensing and appearance fees. (Of course the Kardashians and other proteges have exponentially scaled and digitized the model.) But I'd fallen short in penetrating who she really is, why she'd dedicated her life to transforming herself into what she described to me as a "Rorschach test in pink" — a figure who simultaneously elects to commute among us and hold herself apart, in her formulation, "on top of a pink cloud on top of a pink mountain."

•••

Jews had assimilated in the postwar period. Surnames Anglicized, religious observance ebbed, kosher compliance curtailed — both to better conform to their American homeland and, often, as a conscious or unconscious departure from the trauma of their European pasts. They'd arrived and imagined themselves anew.

Yet Goldberg becoming Angelyne: That would be a feat far more radical, a leap far more extreme, out of a grim and drab past into a realm of complete fantasy. How fitting it would be for such an act to take place amid the New World shtetl of Hollywood, defined by metamorphosis and make-believe.

To many Jews, Angelyne reads distinctly gentile, the quintessential shiksa, whether by accident or intent. Her taste and status cues exist in a goyish Bermuda Triangle somewhere between Dolly Parton, Loni Anderson and Traci Lords.

But once I floated the idea of Goldberg as Angelyne to friends and colleagues who had been fascinated by her over the years and occasionally had had their own fleeting curbside run-ins, the surprisingly unsurprised reaction (particularly from the Jewish ones) was consensus and instantaneous: That makes sense. The stereotypical old-school shmatte-selling, the hardnosed negotiations, the pure all-purpose chutzpah — "I've known that woman," one happily told me, as if welcoming home a long-lost relative, "all my life."

As thorough as the genealogist had been in piecing together Goldberg's early life, he'd missed an easily Google-able recent connection between Angelyne and her alleged true identity. Late last year, I saw that The Fillmore Gazette, a community newspaper of a small town 60 miles northwest of L.A. in Ventura County, had published online a legal notice on April 28, 2016, that Renee Goldberg had petitioned to change her name to Angelyne Llyne at Ventura Superior Court. (After short-selling her Malibu condo in 2010, she now lives in the Ventura County area of Thousand Oaks.)

If the genealogist's claim is to be believed, Goldberg recently had become eligible to collect Social Security benefits. (It is unknown whether Angelyne has applied for such benefits under any name.) While the Social Security Administration had previously not required applicants to document proof, the policy changed in 2005 after Congress took action in response to terror concerns.

I drove to the Ventura County courthouse to get the document. She claimed to have been born on Jan. 26, 1962 (a dozen years after the genealogist's records indicate), and to be from the statistically gentile Louisville, Kentucky. As for the reason for the name change, she states on the form, "This is my stage name that I use and have used since 1978."

Goldberg also listed a residential address that was 2 miles away. When I headed over, I discovered it was a commercial showroom for personalized trophies, plaques, gavels, medallions and clocks called Custom Awards & Engraving. I decided to refrain from asking owners Jerry and Linda Mendelsohn about Angelyne for the time being.

As it happens, Goldberg's sister, now Annette Block, lives in Oxnard, 10 minutes south of the showroom. She and her husband run a wholesale business selling stuffed animals and dolls. (Angelyne, incidentally, had quite a few stuffed animals strewn about her Corvette when I drove around with her.) One of the dolls for sale is named the Angeline, an alternative spelling she used early on — and was credited with when she played a part in the 1977 sex comedy Can I Do It … 'Til I Need Glasses? (the film debut of Robin Williams).

•••

Scott Hennig, a 60-year-old portrait illustrator from Idaho, has been Angelyne's assistant, close friend and gatekeeper since the late 1980s. We'd spoken many times but always over the phone. He'd declined to meet when I requested an interview while profiling Angelyne two years ago, stating he preferred to remain "behind the scenes." I told him that a self-described genealogist had come forward with documentation attesting to the fact that Angelyne was in fact Renee Goldberg.

Hennig scoffed. "This stuff comes up every few years — it seems to get more and more ridiculous," he says. "My favorite one of all was this 300-pound black woman who claimed to be her mother. 'I'm your long-lost brother,' 'your twin sister.' Chalk it up to life in Hollywood. I've never heard of 'Renee Goldberg.' It's laughable, it's outrageous." And as for the genealogist? "This guy needs to get a life. It's almost like ..." He thought for a moment. "Like stalker stuff, it really is. It's kind of creepy. It's weird."

I brought up the name-change document connecting Renee Goldberg to Angelyne, and told him I would be happy to send over some of the genealogist's material for her review. "I'm not saying the paperwork isn't legitimate," he responded, growing testy. "I'm saying it ain't her. Look, I get emails from another Scott Hennig, a karate expert in Texas. People think that's me. There are a lot of girls out there named Angelyne. I don't know what to tell you. And who knows how legitimate this old stuff is, going back to World War II?"

Hennig went on, wondering, "And who's this guy? He's poking into Angelyne's business — why don't we get his name?" I put that question to the genealogist soon afterward, who'd communicated with me under the pseudonym Ed Thompson.

"There's a difference between her and me — and she and most people," he reasoned by phone. "She's a celebrity, and beyond that, she forfeited any claim of privacy when she ran, as a joke or a stunt or not, for governor of California" during the recall race that Arnold Schwarzenegger won in 2003. "As for me," he went on, explaining he had a government job that included a top-secret clearance, "reputation is fairly important, and the controversy that might be involved in this situation is not part of that culture. There's a minute possibility that surreptitious activity — not illegal but surreptitious — could reflect badly on a top-secret clearance."

I sent Hennig the name-change document and the yearbook photos the day after we spoke. Subsequent efforts by phone and email to discuss those materials with him — or, better yet, Angelyne — were repeatedly dodged.

•••

On a rainy Tuesday evening nearly two weeks later, I was reporting on another story at a Sunset Strip tattoo shop when I spotted Angelyne's new Pepto Bismol-hued Corvette Z06 gleaming under a street light across the street. It was parked in front of 1980s hair metal haven the Rainbow Bar & Grill.

I soon found the reclusive Hennig, clad in a denim jacket and jeans, loitering in an empty upstairs hallway next to a Pantera poster. He looked just like the lanky fellow whose over-exposed vintage photos had appeared beside his boss' in the 2005 premiere issue of Hot P!nk, Angelyne's short-lived glossy fan magazine. Before I could say hello, she emerged from an adjacent restroom, in full regalia.

Her eyes went wide as she shook my hand. I asked if Hennig had conveyed my queries about Renee Goldberg and the Holocaust. While he stood mute a few feet away, she stammered, "I have a weird stalker who has been following me and hanging underwear outside my home and all sorts of things. We're going to catch him — big time!" Usually, she explained of her history with obsessives, "I use reverse psychology on them and they go away."

As Motley Crue's "Girls, Girls, Girls" softly piped in overhead, I offered my sympathies, asking if she'd yet taken legal action or informed the authorities. In the past she'd told me she'd filed restraining orders against two stalkers. Angelyne said she and her team hadn't — that they were "building a case."

Angelyne cast herself as a victim of a scheme, and me as an unwitting — or even witting — pawn. (The next day I spoke with the genealogist, who'd previously told me that he had "no tie to her other than curiosity," and asked him if he was stalking her. "No, not at all," he chuckled. "It's a contorted, convenient way to try to come up with a semi-plausible story. Or not even that plausible. It doesn't even make any sense. How could this kind of information about her past possibly be part of a plot to force her to do anything?")

I asked Angelyne about the Ventura County name-change document. Her expression scrunched. "It was a complication thing," she said, tipping from one foot to the other. "I don't want to talk about it." I pressed, and she said she'd have her lawyer call me. I asked if it would be her business attorney, William Remery, or the attorney on the document, David Lehr. "Someone else."

She wheeled around to Topic A. "I know you want it to be true because you're Jewish — and that's adorable!" This last word was enunciated with her breathy falsetto inflection, a stagey girlishness that Paris Hilton appropriated. I told her, without success, why my interest was justifiable on journalistic terms. She nodded, unbowed: "Is your editor Jewish?"

She bid me goodbye with a hug — "I know you love me and don't want to hurt me" — and a promise that I'd hear from her lawyer. Angelyne also stated that it's her inalienable right alone to share her story as she sees fit — or not. (Earlier, regarding the details of her past, she'd told me, "I want to save it for my memoirs; that's my right for my own financial interest.") Later, when I left, I saw her on the sidewalk beside her Corvette under a translucent pink umbrella, huddled in what appeared to be an intense conversation with Hennig.

The next day, curious to revisit those Hennig photos, I unearthed from the bottom of a pile on my newsroom desk the premiere issue of Hot P!nk, which Angelyne bulldozed me into purchasing two years ago for $50 — along with other merchandise — before even agreeing to seriously discuss participation in a potential profile in THR. What instead caught my eye were the advertisements, which on closer inspection all seemed to be personally connected to her: the North Hollywood auto body shop that I'd elsewhere read custom-paints her Corvette; the late Beverly Hills plastic surgeon Dr. George Semel, who she'd previously told me was her "artistic collaborator."

I kept scanning. There was an eighth-page ad from Custom Awards & Engraving, the trophy business Angelyne listed as her residential address on the name-change document. Co-owner Linda Mendelsohn also was mentioned in the text, which congratulated Angelyne on the launch of the magazine. Bingo.

•••

A fortnight passed without word from Angelyne. I rang Hennig and told him I was still looking for clarification. Where, at least, was the follow-up from the mystery attorney? This time he was curt. "I'll tell her you called," he said, his tone cold, hanging up. It would be the last I'd hear from either of them.

The next day I dialed Goldberg's sister, Annette Block. Her husband, Stanley, picked up. I explained I was working on a piece about Goldberg and her life before becoming Angelyne. "Well, Angelyne …" he began, knowingly, tentatively, before a voice in the background interrupted him. He came back on: "Give me a call tomorrow." When we talked again, he acknowledged knowing Angelyne at "one time in my life, maybe 40 years ago," but insisted that "my wife is not related to her." His spouse declined to speak to me.

Next I called Goldberg's stepsister, Norma St. Michel, who resides in Van Nuys in the San Fernando Valley. I brought up Angelyne. "Oh, I have no idea," she said, an edge to her voice, cutting me off and hanging up.

Finally, I tracked down Michael Strauss, the Jewish boy (scion of a Beverly Hills dynasty forged by the changeable reader board on movie theater marquees) whom she'd wed in the late 1960s. He was now a family man living in Carlsbad after a successful career manufacturing acrylic furniture.

I told him what I was calling about. "Holy smokes," he said, astonished. "I haven't talked to Angelyne in years. I've kind of followed her on the internet."

We chatted for an hour. Strauss had tender memories of Goldberg, referring alternatively in the past and present to her as "Angelyne" and "Renee." He'd never spoken publicly about the identity of his first wife before, and only rarely in private, he said. (An exception: In 2016 when she applied for a new driver's license, a DMV investigator contacted him to corroborate her true identity.)

They'd met through mutual friends while she was still living on the Westside. "She was the most gorgeous redhead," he said. "She was unique, beautiful, smart." Later, during their short matrimony, they lived together with Annette and her first husband at the corner of Hollywood Boulevard and Vine Street, "right where Wolfman Jack used to record." Strauss emailed me photos while we were talking: the pair posing barefoot by the pool at a friend's backyard party, a striking black-and-white portrait he'd taken of Goldberg at his family's Trousdale Estates home. (A budding photographer, he shot the likes of Donovan and War.) And, most importantly, he sent the same yearbook photo the genealogist had shown me.

Strauss explained that Goldberg's childhood had been difficult. Her father, a man with a concentration camp number tattooed on his arm, had been controlling, cruel and narrow-minded, propelling her to flee home early. Like many survivors of trauma, Henry didn't discuss it. This extended, to Strauss' memory, as far as Goldberg's own history; her father told her she was born in Israel, not a German displaced-persons camp. Regardless, "she has never considered herself Jewish."

Strauss was surprised to learn from me that Goldberg's mother had died just a few years before he met her; he'd always thought it had been much earlier, a hardened scar. "She'd never talk about her mother — ever, ever, ever. It was a subject that couldn't be brought up. If I brought it up, it was shut down."

After they broke up — it was amicable — he traveled for several years, returning to L.A. in the mid-1970s. "I hooked up with Renee again, and she was Angelyne," he said. "I wasn't there when she made the transition. All of a sudden, big boobs, blond hair, this voice — the voice used to make me nuts. It didn't compute with who I'd known she was."

It would be another decade before she'd achieve notoriety for her pioneering famous-for-being-famous billboard campaign. "As an entrepreneur, I was sad that she wasn't ever able to be more [financially] successful," Strauss said of her career, which emerged out of punk and new wave bands and occasional bit parts in films. "Why didn't she take it farther? Why not a TV show? She invented this marvelous, crazy, out-of-this-world character but couldn't fully sell it. I was always a Renee rooter: 'Come on, girl, take it to the next level!' But she only had the capacity to take it so far."

When they broke up, Strauss held on to some of her effects — personal photos, official documents — "because she didn't want them, and I wasn't just going to throw them away. I mean, what if she eventually wanted them back? Except she never did. I saw her in the early 1990s, and I said, 'I have these things.' She didn't want them. She wanted nothing to do with it. She'd created another life."

Why had she done it? "You'd have to ask her that," he said softly.

Renee Goldberg had purely committed to the fundamental principle of Hollywood — escapism — by inhabiting the character she conjured to the point of no return. Like many dreamers, she adopted a stage name and altered her body and behavior to better position a prospective entertainment career that, like many dreamers, never panned out quite as intended. Nevertheless, far more than most, by any definition of success, she truly became the person she was pretending to be.

Strauss eventually, reluctantly, ventured a guess. "It's a persona that must have suited her," he said. "It made her way in life. It's not an easy world out there."

A version of this story first appeared in the Aug. 2 issue of The Hollywood Reporter magazine. To receive the magazine, click here to subscribe.
COMMENTS
The Hollywood Reporter
© 2017 The Hollywood Reporter
All rights reserved.

Terms of Use | Privacy | Sitemap | About Our Ads

About Us
Login
Daily Edition
Subscribe
Subscriber Services
Back Issues
Advertising
Contact Us
Careers
Industry Jobs
Follow Us On
TWITTER
Find Us On
FACEBOOK
Watch Us On
YOUTUBE
Our affiliate publications

Billboard
Vibe
Spin
Stereogum
Death and Taxes
The California Sunday Magazine
AUGUST 3, 2017
After the Shooting
A year in the life of Gwen Woods
By Jaeah Lee
Photographs by Erica Deeman
That Wednesday began the way it was supposed to. Gwen Woods got out of bed an hour before sunrise, showered, and dressed for work. As she was leaving the house, her phone rang. “God morning,” she greeted Mario, her youngest son. “God morning,” he replied.
Every morning since his release from prison 15 months earlier, Mario would call, and they’d talk through their plans for the day. Gwen was about to start her commute from San Francisco to the mental health clinic where she worked as an administrator. Mario was heading to the UPS office to pick up a uniform; the next day would be his first on the job. Gwen reminded him that he had an appointment with his parole officer in the afternoon. “You have a schedule today,” she told him. “Stay on it.”
“Mom, you need anything? You got lunch money?” he asked. Of her three sons, 26-year-old Mario worried about her the most. Gwen liked to say that if her two older sons were ever to put her in a home for the elderly, Mario would be right behind them to rescue her. “I’ll see you tonight,” she said before hanging up. “Love you.”
Gwen, who was 54 years old, made a point to have dinner with her sons almost every night. Sometimes one of them couldn’t attend — that night, it was her oldest, Monroe. The plan was for her to drive back to the city and collect Mario, Michael, her middle son, and a niece. Maybe they would return to the Chinese restaurant with the orange chicken Mario liked, or maybe they’d get takeout and sit by the bay. It didn’t really matter, as long as they were together.
Before leaving work, Gwen checked her phone and noticed a friend’s Facebook post. Did anyone know more about the shooting on Third? he asked. Third Street ran through the Bayview district, a few blocks down from the house she once owned. Monroe still lived nearby. Anytime someone was shot in the Bayview, it was almost guaranteed she knew him or knew someone who did.
“Where’s Mario?” Gwen asked when she arrived at her niece’s home. He normally would have called her two or three times by then, asking when she was going to arrive. Gwen instructed her niece to wait while she went and picked up Michael. As she left, she said, “When you see Mario, tell him to sit down and stay put.”
When Gwen arrived at Michael’s apartment, her phone buzzed with a message from the friend who had posted about the shooting. Gwen opened the message, and a video started playing. She caught a glimpse of a small figure crouching in front of uniformed police officers holding guns. Then the sound of gunshots. She dialed her niece and asked her to go on Facebook. “Tell me it’s not Mario,” she said.
Gwen kept the conversation vague and brief. Michael and Mario were one year apart and close — people used to think they were twins. She didn’t want to alarm Michael unless she was absolutely sure. That would break him, she thought. She headed for the door. Michael asked where she was going. She’d be right back, she told him. She needed to check on something. As Gwen got into the elevator, her niece called. “That’s him, Auntie,” she said.
Later, Gwen would recall only fragments of what she saw in the video that first time. The black baseball cap. The curls of an Afro sticking out from underneath it. The gunshots.
Gwen picked up her niece and two other family members. They called the nearest hospital: There had been no DOAs that night. If the person had died at the scene, they were told, the body would have been taken to the coroner. They drove downtown to the Hall of Justice, a stark concrete complex that houses the county morgue. No one had answers. They headed back to the Bayview and stopped at the police station, where Gwen spoke to an officer behind bulletproof glass who wasn’t any help.
Before leaving work, Gwen checked her phone and noticed a friend’s Facebook post. Did anyone know more about the shooting on Third? he asked.
Gwen called Mario and left him messages: “Mar, you’ve got to give me a call back. Call me. Let me know where you’re at.” She texted the friend who had sent her the video to say she thought Mario may have been the person whom the police had shot. He told her to stop playing. Who would joke about something like that? She didn’t want to believe it, either, but she knew that crouched stance, the one he assumed when they argued or when she nagged. “Mom, can we just drop it?” he would plead, leaning forward with his knees bent and his palms pressed together. She knew his black cap. His curly brown ’fro.
After dropping off everyone around midnight, Gwen decided to visit the scene of the shooting. She spotted a knot of people gathered under a streetlamp and two tall trees on Third Street. They had lit candles and placed flowers at the foot of a metal fence. Gwen asked if anyone had a name yet, and people murmured that they didn’t. How kind of them, she thought, to begin mourning before knowing who had died. Someone asked if Gwen knew. “I believe it was my baby,” she said.
A stout man in his late 40s named Shawn Richard stepped forward and introduced himself. Richard ran a local organization called Brothers Against Guns, and he knew people in the police department. He offered to make a few calls. Soon Gwen found herself back on the steps of the Hall of Justice, surrounded by some of the people from the vigil — all strangers — waiting for detectives to arrive. Save for the crowd’s chatter and the occasional passing car, the streets were quiet. Three men in suits turned the corner, and Gwen suddenly felt numb. She would later forget their precise words, but not what they told her: Until the coroner confirmed the identity of the body, they couldn’t be certain, but they believed the victim’s name was Mario Woods.
The site in San Francisco where police shot Mario Woods

WHEN OFFICERS CONFRONTED Mario on December 2, 2015, a city bus was dropping off passengers at a nearby stop; several pulled out cellphones to record what was happening. The first video was shared on Instagram within minutes. A second was uploaded to Twitter and a third to Facebook. In all three, police officers have their guns drawn, shots ring out, and Mario falls. In one, a woman screams, “Oh, my God, oh, my God.” In another, a man yells, “Nigga is going down! Oh! Oh! Oh! Ohhhh!”
Mario Woods was the 906th person in the United States to be shot and killed by police in 2015 — 228 of whom were black men — according to a count maintained by The Washington Post. Mario’s was the sixth fatal police shooting in San Francisco that year. At the time, the city’s police department was facing criticism for ignoring the entrenched racism among its ranks. Within days, Malia Cohen, the city supervisor who represents the Bayview, called the officers in the video “an ethnically diverse firing squad.” Reverend Amos C. Brown, the head of San Francisco’s NAACP chapter, told The New York Times that “Ferguson is here.” News accounts of Mario’s death spread as far as Sydney and Tehran.
The day after the shooting, Gwen met a local ABC News reporter for her first television interview at Duggan’s funeral home, where she had begun making arrangements. She wore a long black coat, silver hoop earrings, and a lavender felt cap that partially concealed her face. The camera zoomed in, exposing the light-brown freckles dotting her cheeks and the wrinkles beneath her eyes. The reporter asked her what she thought of the way her son died. “They executed my child,” Gwen told him. “I thought there was no compassion. I thought they looked at him like he was nothing or nobody or belonged to nobody.” Tears ran down her face. “I just wish I was there, because I swear I would have threw myself in front of him.”
Afterward, Gwen returned to the site of the shooting. She could see where bullets had pierced the metal fence, where Mario’s blood had stained the sidewalk. Rain fell. A crowd bunched around her; camera lights illuminated her damp face. Following a moment of silence, they marched up a hill toward a gymnasium in St. Paul of the Shipwreck Catholic Church, holding up yellow signs and chanting “Murder!” Under a basketball hoop, Gwen addressed a gathering of almost a thousand, clutching a ball of tissue in one hand and a microphone in the other. “They’re going to portray my child as horrible, I guarantee you that,” she told them. “I’m going to be his voice.”
Police Chief Greg Suhr had asked to meet Gwen in private, and the next morning, Shawn Richard accompanied her to his office. According to Richard, Suhr offered his condolences and explained the evidence he planned to present at a town hall meeting that evening — including video frames that he said showed Mario pointing a knife at an officer. For 45 minutes, Gwen sat across from his desk and listened, dabbing tears from her face. She doesn’t remember much, except that Suhr gave her a hug. Gwen would always regret letting him.

Gwen Woods watches as a backhoe shovels dirt over Mario’s casket.  PHOTOGRAPH BY WESAAM AL-BADRY/CONTACT PRESS IMAGES

GWEN HAD READ enough about police shootings to know she needed legal advice, and the person she immediately thought of was John Burris, an Oakland-based civil rights lawyer who had represented Rodney King and other plaintiffs in police brutality and shooting cases in California. When Gwen met Burris, she told him Mario was going to need a champion in the courtroom. He told her to remember that she was first and foremost Mario’s mother. “You don’t have to be an activist,” he said. In the months that followed, she would think about those words often.
On December 11, Gwen filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the city and county of San Francisco, accusing the police officers involved in the shooting of using “excessive, arbitrary, and/or unreasonable force” and police officials of condoning their behavior. Although Mario was holding a knife, the suit maintained that he never threatened the officers or passersby. It also sought damages, the amount of which would be determined at trial.
One night, Gwen joined a protest outside of the Bayview Police Station. Pacing before a lineup of officers in riot gear, she screamed through tears: “Shoot him down like an animal? For real? Kill him like he’s nothing? Like garbage?” It was one of the few times Gwen would let herself be consumed by rage in public. “You can’t be angry,” she later told me, “because people will think, ‘Oh, he was angry just like his mother.’”
Gwen avoided the video of Mario’s shooting as much as she could, but, inevitably, it found her. The first time was at Michael’s apartment, when a local station replayed the footage. She ran out of the room and yelled for Michael to close his eyes. The second time, in a girlfriend’s living room, Gwen hurried to the kitchen. After it was over, she returned to find her friend crying in front of the TV. The third time, Gwen was alone, watching NewsOne Now with Roland Martin. As the footage flashed, Gwen couldn’t reach the remote in time. She cowered in a corner of the room, squeezed her eyes, and covered her ears. She counted backward from 100, loudly and slowly. She prayed that by the time she reached zero, it would be safe to open her eyes again.
In addition to the official autopsy, lawyers from Burris’s office examined the body. The funeral could not be held for almost two weeks. When Gwen entered Duggan’s for the viewing, she recognized the small, carpeted room. It was the same one where, four years earlier, she held a wake for Michael and Mario’s father. Now flower arrangements and photos of Mario decorated the room. On one wall played a film he had made as a teenager about life in the Bayview and adjacent Hunters Point, featuring interviews with his friends and Gwen.
Gwen avoided the video of Mario’s shooting as much as she could, but, inevitably, it found her. As the footage flashed, she squeezed her eyes and covered her ears.
Mario had sustained so many bullet wounds that the mortician had wanted to enclose the casket in glass, afraid that the body would fall apart on the slightest contact. But Gwen wanted to keep it open. She stood over the casket and leaned in as close as she could to Mario’s face. His skin was caked in makeup, his body dressed in a black suit and red tie, padded from underneath to make him appear less limp. “They had to really pack the head,” Gwen said. “You really couldn’t kiss him because he was so fragile.” She noticed a crack on his right cheek. She wondered if a bullet had flown out of it.
More than 100 people entered the Cornerstone Missionary Baptist Church, a two-story white structure that overlooks the sidewalk where Mario was killed. TV vans were parked along the street. Gwen recognized a lot of the faces, but she hadn’t expected to see so many she didn’t know. Her grief began to feel bigger than her own. She saw it in the pallbearers who wore suits and ties to match Mario’s. She saw it in the mother who told her she’d lost her son in an unsolved homicide and in the little girl who asked Gwen for a hug. She saw it in the young men who came up to her to tell her about the times they had been held at gunpoint by the police.
As the casket descended into the grave, Gwen kissed a rose, her lips barely touching its petals before she dropped it into the darkness. She released white doves from a cage. She knew that Mario would have objected to making a spectacle of himself, but she also knew that he would have humored her if it would make her feel better.
Gwen returned to the grave a few days later with two cups of coffee, one for Mario. She would come back again and again to prune the grass. She would buy a headstone inlaid with an image of him looking as though he was squinting into the sun. She and Michael and Monroe would place solar lights around the headstone, then come back at night to make sure they worked, because Mario had never liked the dark. But for now, the site was just a mound of dirt. Gwen sat beside it and thought about digging through with her hands. I might be able to hold him one more time. She knew that sounded insane. But when a mother loses a child, as she would later put it, part of her sanity goes with him.

Looking down Le Conte Avenue in the Bayview district toward what was once the Woods family home

GWEN’S EARLIEST MEMORY of Mario is the smell of blood while cradling him in the hospital. “He was such a beautiful baby, cute as a girl,” she told me. Mario was that kid, she liked to say: the one who never forgot birthdays or Mother’s Day, the one who was most upset when his parents argued. “That kid looked at me as if I could do any- and everything,” Gwen said, “as if I could move the world.”
When Mario was about 4, Gwen and her husband — whom everyone called “Big Mike” — decided to move to Houston. Gwen’s father objected, asking how she could move back to the state he had left decades earlier to escape Jim Crow. But by then it was the early 1990s, when the Bayview’s poverty and crime rates were among the highest in the country. Gwen told her parents that San Francisco no longer felt like a place to raise children.
In Houston, the family lived out some of their happiest days. Big Mike had a job as a mechanic at the airport, Gwen as a district manager for the Lancôme cosmetics line. He worked during the day, she at night. He cooked dinner for the kids, while Gwen made roasts, homemade fajitas, and Mario’s favorite mac ’n’ cheese with bacon bits and condensed milk on her days off. Each summer, they bought season passes to Six Flags. Mario, who was afraid of heights, usually stuck by Gwen’s side.
In 1999, Gwen’s mother, then a widow, was diagnosed with cancer, and Gwen flew back to take care of her while she received chemotherapy. For a while, Gwen and Big Mike tried to make the distance work. Gwen had hoped to bring her mother to Houston, but the cancer persisted. Eventually, Big Mike gave Gwen an ultimatum: Come back to Houston or go their separate ways. Gwen decided she couldn’t leave, and the kids remained with her at her mother’s house in San Francisco.
For Gwen and her sons, splitting up with Big Mike was the first of a succession of blows. A few months later, her mother died, leaving the house and other assets to Gwen. Her oldest brother and sister sued, claiming a share of the estate, causing a rift within the family. The lawsuit dragged on for nearly three years. A judge dismissed the case, but before it was through, Gwen had spent roughly $40,000 in legal fees, money she had to borrow against the house. Within a few months of the decision, both her brother and sister died of cancer. Gwen had reconciled with her brother, but not her sister.
The lawsuit and single parenthood strained Gwen’s finances, even with a full-time job as an office administrator at a clothing company. She worried how her sons would internalize the turmoil and tried hard to give them a sense of stability — to keep a roof over their heads and food on the table, just as her parents had done for her. For five years, Gwen worked weekends at a law office. Sometimes after she had finished up, she would tell Mario she was going to walk by the water before starting dinner. Mario would ask if he could come, but Gwen would tell him to stay home and finish his schoolwork. “I realize now that was supposed to be our time,” she said.
The Bayview had been a rough place for a while, but now Gwen worried when her sons left the house. After Mario entered high school, he began to get into trouble, mostly fights. He was smaller and quieter than many of his classmates, which made him an easy target. “They always wanted him first,” said Rokesha Pineda, his best friend since sixth grade. But there were also arrests — for stealing a Walkman and shoplifting — which led to several months in a group home.
When Mario said he wanted to buy a gun, he and Gwen got into a series of arguments. “I told him, ‘You don’t need that, Mar, you really don’t,’” she recalled. “‘God will protect you.’ He said, ‘God is not out there on the streets with me.’” Then one day, Mario was walking with a girl when he was shot in the leg. “The streets work like this: Either you’re going to be a victim, or you have to be an aggressor,” Gwen told me. “You can talk to a thousand brothers, and they can tell you the struggle.” When Mario was about 16, he and a friend were arrested after police searched the car they were in and found a gun. Mario spent a year in juvenile detention and group homes. “I prayed my sons would make it through their proverb years and into their wisdom years,” Gwen said.
The headstone that Gwen and her sons chose for Mario

IN LATE FEBRUARY 2008, six months after Mario turned 18, Gwen finished work and drove to the neighborhood basketball court where he played after school. It was routine for her to pick him up, but he asked if he could stay a little longer to finish a game. He never came home.
Along with another man, Mario was arrested and charged with attempted robbery. Prosecutors alleged that during the previous month, Mario had twice held up people at gunpoint inside a billiards hall. On the third attempt, customers rushed Mario and hit him with their pool cues as he tried to escape. When Gwen found out that Mario was in jail, “I wanted to shut everything out,” she told me. “All I could do was cry. I felt so hopeless in that moment, for what was going to be.”
Mario spent more than two years in county jail awaiting trial. In July 2010, he accepted a plea bargain and was sentenced to seven years for one count of second-degree robbery and one count of participation in a criminal street gang. Gwen visited Mario at Folsom State Prison every weekend unless it was on lockdown. Four days before his 22nd birthday, she wrote him: “Two more B-Days after this one we will celebrate together. Seems that your coming home is what I have to anticipate in my life, my something to hope for. Stay up. Strong. Make this work for my sake. You are loved. Mom.”
A cellmate of Mario’s told me that he mostly kept to himself. He remembered him reading novels about street life and talking about his plans to see Big Mike in Houston when he got out. One day in 2011, after a visit from Gwen, Mario told him that his father had died. Mario sat down and rubbed his head and knees, swaying back and forth, muttering to himself.
“You know, I cry sometimes when I think about you and grandma and Big Mike,” Mario wrote in a letter to Gwen. “I ain’t cried in a long time. I believe you are my weight that keeps me grounded to Earth in this life. Without you there, there’d be no Mario.” He would later tell Gwen that while in prison he “tried everything” — every kind of drug — in order to cope.
Mario was paroled in September 2014. In the days after he came home, Gwen made his favorite mac ’n’ cheese. She took him to the bank and helped him open a checking account. She showed him how to use an ATM. She could see that prison had changed Mario. At a family barbecue celebrating his homecoming, he retreated to a bedroom, unaccustomed to being surrounded by people. Once he and Gwen went to the movies but left early — the darkness was too much. He preferred sleeping on the floor because he was used to the hard surface. “It felt like he was stuck,” she said, “while the rest of the world had moved on.” She could hear him in his room talking in two voices. Sometimes he would not recognize her. At one point, she checked him into a hospital. Later, he was prescribed medical marijuana for anxiety and paranoia.
Gwen remembers Mario asking what she thought of Stalin. “The dictator?” Gwen asked. “Yeah, that guy,” he said. Mario told her that Stalin believed a man who doesn’t contribute to society should do it a favor and off himself or be taken out. “I don’t know what your future would hold for you,” she said. “That’s only between you and your God. Everybody’s entitled to make their mistakes and be redeemed from them.” After a pause, Mario responded, “Yeah. Me, too. I believe that, too.”
More than 100 people entered the Cornerstone Missionary Baptist Church. Gwen recognized a lot of the faces, but she hadn’t expected to see so many she didn’t know.
According to Gwen, Mario had developed a meth habit — it’s not clear when — and a few months after his release he went into a re-entry and rehab program, living at a transitional home in San Francisco. Although he had earned his GED in prison, he took courses to earn his high school diploma. “Mario was one of the most motivated people I had,” a teacher told me. Gwen helped him learn how to drive. She took him to his driver’s test, and when Mario got out of the car and gave her a smile, it was the happiest she had seen him since prison. Mario bought his first car, a used green Camaro, and started working part time.
Shortly after Mario’s release, Gwen was laid off from the clothing company. Unable to make her mortgage, she was forced to short sell her house. For a while, she stayed with friends and in hotels south of San Francisco. Briefly, she worked the night shift as a cashier at Target. She and Mario met for lunch whenever they could. They bought hamburgers and coffee, drove to a park by the bay, and watched the airplanes take off from SFO. We’ll get through this, she told him. When Gwen got off work at midnight, she would call Mario, who would ask her to drive by his dorm and honk so he could hear through his window. He wouldn’t let her hang up the phone until she locked the door behind her.
The last time Gwen saw Mario was on Thanksgiving. They went to dinner at a cousin’s house in Sacramento — not far from the apartment she had recently moved into. Mario didn’t seem well, and Gwen thought he might have the flu. When his cousin got a pillow for him, Mario sat next to Gwen and leaned his head on her shoulder. Gwen took him home and heated him a bowl of soup before he went to bed.
At approximately 3:49 p.m. on December 2, 2015, San Francisco police received a call reporting a stabbing on the 6600 block of Third Street and that the suspect was on the loose. According to officers, they spotted Mario, who matched the suspect’s description, near Third. He was holding a knife, which police ordered him to drop. Over the next ten minutes, they fired beanbag rounds and pepper spray at him. Mario fell to his knee but got back up. At least five officers surrounded him with their guns drawn. “Just drop it!” one bystander yelled as Mario began shuffling away from the police. An officer walked ahead of Mario and blocked his path. Within seconds, police started shooting. More than 40 bullets were fired. Twenty-one struck Mario, two in the head.
Photographs of Mario growing up

ON A SATURDAY AFTERNOON, two months after Mario’s death, Gwen filed into the First African Methodist Episcopal Church in Oakland, thinking about how she should have dressed lighter for the sunny winter day. She took a seat in a pew near the altar, in a section reserved for “the mothers” — women like her who had also lost their children in encounters with law enforcement. Samaria Rice, mother of Tamir Rice; Valerie Bell, mother of Sean Bell; Geneva Reed-Veal, mother of Sandra Bland; Gwendolyn Carr, mother of Eric Garner; Lezley McSpadden, mother of Michael Brown. Here is the club no one wants to join, Gwen thought, and she was its newest member.
They were there to commemorate the birthday of Oscar Grant, the 22-year-old black man who was shot and killed by an officer on a transit platform in Oakland on New Year’s Day 2009. Grant’s mother and uncle had started the memorial shortly after, in part to bring together families who shared the same pain. The uncle had introduced himself to Gwen at a gathering for Mario and let her know that he and his sister wanted to help in any way they could. As Gwen watched the women speak, she felt intimidated by their courage. “You feel in a place that you’re probably the weakest,” she said. “To see mothers who transition and say, ‘No, I will not just roll over and play the victim’ is very powerful.”
Gwen was beginning to learn that the world of grieving mothers was an odd place: Grief was not hers alone but something many others laid claim to. Every day was a battle to set the record straight, to protect Mario in death, not just from the police but also from those who wanted to turn him into a symbol. It was easy for the Mario she loved — endearing, exasperating, funny, smart, confused — to get lost.
In the months immediately after “Mario’s execution,” as Gwen called it, she attended as many community meetings, marches, and rallies as she could. Protesters demanded that the mayor fire the police chief and issue a public apology and that the officers who shot Mario be arrested and tried. “I think they all felt, We are Mario Woods. Mario is our son, our brother,” Phelicia Jones, a longtime community organizer who has become close to Gwen, told me. “It was very personal.”
George Gascón, the district attorney, promised to carry out a thorough investigation of the shooting. San Francisco police were already under scrutiny after his office had uncovered a series of racist and homophobic text messages exchanged among at least 14 officers, including one referring to “cross burning” and another stating that black people “should be spayed.” After Mario’s death, Mayor Ed Lee and a number of city supervisors asked for the federal government to step in. A few weeks later, the Justice Department announced that it would launch a two-year review.
When the medical examiner issued his findings, media reports homed in on the toxicology results showing that Mario’s body contained traces of meth and marijuana. The same day, city attorneys filed a response to Gwen’s civil suit claiming that the shooting was lawful and justified.

Gwen at her apartment in Sacramento

GWEN STOOD ON the steps of City Hall one afternoon in May waiting to greet a group of hunger strikers marching against police brutality. She noticed a young man walk toward her and felt a heavy weight in her stomach. It was the man whom Mario was accused of stabbing. He explained that he had waited for the right moment to approach her. At first, Gwen turned away, but after a few minutes, she decided to hear him out. She liked to believe there are three sides to every story: “My side, your side, and the truth.”
He told her that he was sitting in his parked car when he saw Mario acting belligerent and manic — he appeared to be on drugs. She asked him why, then, he had gotten out of the car and risked a fight. He dodged her question. At the end of their conversation, Gwen realized what he had really wanted to say: He wasn’t the one who called the cops.
Whenever a stranger approached Gwen, her first response was to put up her guard. She was never sure whom to trust. Some people asked for her home address. While filling up her car at a gas station, Gwen was beckoned by a minister driving a Bentley. He offered Gwen his condolences and told her his grandson had been shot and killed by cops. Then he started explaining that the city would probably offer her $3 million, before Gwen cut him off. No amount of money would bring her son back, she told him. Gwen resented how many people were fixated on the lawsuit, assuming that she would receive a large payout from the city. The idea of accepting money for her son’s death made her feel guilty and having to prove why her son deserved to live only made her ill.
Some people told her how they admired her strength, or how they understood her pain. Each time, Gwen would correct them. No, she was not strong; no one was that strong. And no, they did not understand her pain. Because she had lost parents and siblings, too — and none of that came close to losing a child.
Then there were the mothers who seemed to envy Gwen — mothers who lost their sons in homicides. At least mothers whose sons were shot by the police got public attention, one said at a community meeting. The sentiment disturbed Gwen. “What you’re really saying,” she told me, “is that you would exchange my pain for your pain.” Some mothers talked about how their sons didn’t deserve to die, that they were angels who never broke the law. Gwen tried not to take that to mean that her son somehow deserved it.
SAN FRANCISCO AND Sacramento began to take on different meanings for Gwen. San Francisco was where she fought for Mario in public — a role she fervently believed in but also found exhausting. Whenever the attention became too much and she felt the city closing in, Gwen took refuge in her apartment in Sacramento. Driving between the two cities, Gwen liked to turn down the radio so it was too soft to register but loud enough to muffle her thoughts. Draped over the passenger seat was a white T-shirt with a screen-printed photo of Mario. Sometimes she talked to him as if he were sitting there. The T-shirt made the conversation feel a little more real.
Some people told her how they admired her strength, or how they understood her pain. Each time, Gwen would correct them. No, she was not strong; no one was that strong.
In July, a few days after what would have been Mario’s 27th birthday, Gwen entered her apartment, plopped down on a black leather couch, and switched on the television. On each side of the screen, a tall cabinet encased mementos: framed family photos, Mario’s high school diploma, birthday and Mother’s Day cards he had made over the years. They began with “To My Mother” and ended with “Love, Your Son.” On a recliner, Mario’s dark gray 49ers hoodie lay as though he had just changed out of it. He’d left it there after Thanksgiving.
Gwen grasped for the pieces of Mario left behind. She called his cellphone and left messages. She knew his cell was locked up in evidence, but calling helped. She wrote him messages on Facebook. She scrolled through photos of him on her computer. The one of him as a little boy, posing as a Power Ranger. The last group photo she and her sons took, on Mother’s Day 2015, when Mario bought her flowers and made her a cup of tea. She watched the only video she had of him. Mario is standing in a courtyard, tipping his cap, his other hand giving a peace sign. He didn’t like to be on camera, and that was probably why she stopped recording after only a few seconds. Now she wished she had kept going a little longer.
In her bedroom, she taped a yellow piece of paper on the wall with a poem he had brought home from grade school:
Sometimes you get discouraged
Because I am quite small
And always leave my fingerprints on furniture and walls.
But everyday I’m growing
I’ll be grown up someday
And all those tiny handprints will surely fade away.
When Gwen needed something more tangible, she put on his sneakers or the brown leather dress shoes she bought for him to wear to church. She shuffled around the living room in them and sat on the couch with her legs up, staring at her feet. Sometimes she reached for the strand of his braid tucked inside a cream-colored photo album filled with baby photos of Mario and his brothers. On the page were the words, “The summer of ’99 was a good one.” She stroked the braid and remembered the trips the family took to Six Flags and the day she cut his hair before he went back to middle school. Her sense of time flattened. She wondered if this is what people meant when they talked about depression.
At night, Gwen sometimes found herself staring into her fridge, having forgotten to eat all day, and bingeing on cake, potato chips, or deli meat. She would bundle up in a baby-blue terry-cloth robe and put on a pair of fluffy slippers, escape to her bedroom, and flip on the TV. She didn’t care what was on, as long as it could take her mind elsewhere. She brought her laptop and phone into bed with her, to keep all of her diversions within reach. She wrote in her journal. “Nights are the worst, not enough distractions. It was our time to talk about our day, our plans. How completely and utterly they destroyed my life. Our life.” Then she braced herself for midnight.
Pain struck Gwen unexpectedly, sometimes knocking her over in the aisle of a grocery store. It was the kind of pain that made her want to rip her chest out — the same pain she felt when Mario came out of her womb, she would say. It was the worst after midnight. Gwen called these hours her negotiations with God. She grew up in the church — her dad had been a Baptist minister — and had always believed her faith would carry her family through their most trying moments. But Mario’s death had shaken that faith. Why my son? she asked God. Why couldn’t they have shown him some empathy? Was he wondering where I was before he took those bullets? How scared was he? Couldn’t I have him back, just this once?
Sometimes Mario appeared in her dreams. In one, he was standing across the street from her. She asked him where he had been; she told him that she’d been worried about him. Mario smiled and walked toward her. They hugged. She woke up trembling and gripping herself, rocking back and forth for the next half hour. A friend who was staying with her heard her crying and rushed into the room. He asked if she needed to go to the hospital, but Gwen just kept rocking. She tried to have the same dream, but it never returned.
In the fall, Gwen started applying for jobs. A week after the shooting, she had gone back to work at the mental health clinic but found herself looking at the invoice on the monitor, unable to focus, and resigned. For a while she lived on disability insurance. California offers financial assistance to families of homicide victims, but Gwen discovered that she did not qualify because the officers had not been charged. Monroe and Michael gave her money for groceries whenever they could. Sometimes friends helped her pay the bills.
Gwen put her hand on the spokesman’s chest and, looking directly at him, spoke slowly: “Tell Gascón, Mario Woods’s mother said he has now placed his politics over our children’s lives.”
Gwen missed the routine of work and needed the paycheck, but she also dreaded the question recruiters would eventually ask: Why had she left her last job? In September, she took a temporary position at a university and found it hard to concentrate. You can do it, Mom, she heard Mario say in her head, but she couldn’t bring herself to double-click the Excel file and left after two weeks. She tried again in October. This time the temporary job was with the state voter registration office doing data entry. The hours were long and breaks were short. It kept her busy, though. She liked that people didn’t ask too many questions, except one co-worker who recognized Gwen but didn’t know from where. Gwen didn’t tell her.
She signed up for a gym, exercising on the elliptical and doing crunches the way she used to do with baby Mario sitting on her legs. Monroe and Michael called and visited her more often than they used to. It was hard to be in the same room together without Mario. The first time they came over, Mario’s absence was so overwhelming that they scattered into separate rooms for the rest of the night. Lately, she and Monroe sat on the couch reminiscing about Houston, about how much they missed Mario. She noticed that Michael, who had always been the introverted one, withdrew even further. He didn’t say much, but he’d sometimes walk past her with a can of beer and pause to pat her shoulder, and she understood.


Family photographs in Gwen’s living room

ON A SWEATY DAY in October, Gwen put on an electric-blue dress, high heels, and a trench coat. She took the freeway to San Francisco, back to the Hall of Justice where a few dozen people had gathered for a rally. Gwen walked to the top of the steps and stood in a line of grieving mothers, fathers, uncles, and cousins, among posters of children and a banner reading, Mothers on the March Against Police murders.
Five months earlier, Greg Suhr had resigned as police chief, a move spurred by two more fatal shootings. The Justice Department was one week away from releasing its report, which contained 272 recommendations to correct the San Francisco Police Department’s “deficiencies.” District Attorney Gascón had also presented findings that documented racial bias within the department. But he still hadn’t decided whether he would charge the officers who shot Mario and others, and the protesters at the rally wanted an explanation.
Holding a megaphone, Elaine Brown, the former Black Panther Party chairwoman who organized the event, spoke to the small crowd. “We’re here to make a demand,” she said. “Gascón needs to come out of that office and stop playing around and charge these police with the murder of Mario Woods.” Gwen clapped, her face stern. After the rally, some family members and activists went inside, looking for Gascón.
They squeezed into a hallway and surrounded a spokesman in a gray suit named Alex Bastian. As Gwen made her way to the front, Bastian told the crowd that his office shared their frustrations with how long the investigation had lasted. He shook hands with Gwen, who put her hand on his chest and, looking directly at him, spoke slowly: “Tell Gascón, Mario Woods’s mother said he has now placed his politics over our children’s lives.” Her breath shortened with each sentence. “If he can’t come stare me in the eye or them, tell him to look at the videos. Tell him my people are not animals. Mario wasn’t an animal. He wasn’t what you’re going to read about in that paperwork. You tell him: Be a human being.” When Gwen finished, she averted her eyes as Bastian gave her a hug. Then she walked to the end of the hall and slumped onto a bench.
The truth was that Gwen didn’t see herself as a symbol of a movement. She wasn’t even sure if holding up signs in front of government buildings would change the minds of politicians. She wasn’t sure what would be effective. On a few occasions, she had suggested filling the mailboxes of state legislators with the video of Mario being shot. Maybe then they would feel the urgency to do something.
Gwen also knew it was unlikely any of the officers who shot Mario would face jail. So this, too, she brought into her nightly negotiations with God. Did those officers lie awake at night, as ridden with guilt and pain as she was? Please, God, she prayed. Make them pay.
One afternoon while at work, Gwen got a call from Elaine Brown. She wanted to know if Gwen could come to the Hall of Justice that Friday for the weekly rally she continued to organize. Gwen said she would try, but now that she was working, it would be hard for her to attend. Brown said that other mothers were taking time out of their days, that the protesters had Mario’s best interests at heart. The implication was not lost on Gwen. She decided not to go.
Gwen at Mario's gravesite

AS THE ANNIVERSARY of Mario’s death approached, Gwen felt she would rather stay in bed and let it pass without her. But on December 2, 2016, as the sun began to set behind the shops on Third Street, Gwen walked toward a neighborhood park where television cameras and a crowd holding balloons were waiting for her. She wore a coat over a black T-shirt with Mario’s face on it.
With her lawyer, John Burris, by her side, she answered questions from reporters. (A trial date has not been set for her civil suit.) She greeted friends. She spoke to people she had gotten to know over the past year — doctors, ministers, teachers, strangers who had been moved by Mario’s death. She stopped to hug one woman whose nephew had been killed by the police in 2012. Gwen shared a story about a ladybug she had found in her apartment that she had momentarily convinced herself was a sign from Mario. “I’m deep in my thought in my depression, 11:59 p.m.,” Gwen said, laughing. “Out of nowhere I hear a flutter under my lampshade. I took pictures. I could hear him say, ‘That’s too desperate, Mom.’”
The crowd walked to the site of the shooting. Seven mothers lined up next to Gwen, each holding a long white candle sticking through a paper cup. Their voices shaking, they recited their names and the names of their children.
When Gwen’s turn came, she paused. “It’s a bit overwhelming,” she said, standing on the sidewalk where she had searched for Mario one year earlier. “I need you guys to look at these mothers, because this is just a fraction of who are suffering. Something is not ever right with us. Your new norm is trying to be OK with not being OK.” She broke into tears, thanked the people who had supported her and had fought for Mario, and passed off the mic.
A few people helped Gwen bundle helium-filled balloons. She wrote on one with a black marker, Miss ya, Mar! before letting the wind carry it away. People clapped and cheered as the balloons floated into the night sky.
As the crowd thinned, Gwen walked over to a young man. “Remember that dance Mario used to do?” Gwen asked. He immediately laughed. Mario had wanted to show her the dance on one of their last nights together, but Gwen had been on the phone and asked him to show her another time. She was now desperate to see that dance. But the young man politely declined.
She had been asking about the dance for months, but no one could show it to her, either because they couldn’t recall it well enough or because it was too painful to try. For Gwen, remembering was all that was left. “Some days, I just need someone to tell me something funny about Mario,” she said. “Some days, I just need to talk about my baby.”
JAEAH LEE is a freelance journalist living in San Francisco. Her work has appeared in Pop-Up Magazine, Vice News, and Mother Jones, among other publications. She is a senior fellow at the Schuster Institute for Investigative Journalism at Brandeis University. The Images & Voices of Hope Restorative Narrative Fellowship provided additional support for this story.

ERICA DEEMAN is a San Francisco–based photographer. She recently had her first solo exhibition at the Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive. This fall, she’ll show her Silhouettes series at the Laurence Miller Gallery in New York.
SHARE TWEET
Become a subscriber to read stories like this in our acclaimed print edition.

SUBSCRIBE
MORE STORIES FROM CALIFORNIA SUNDAY


Losing Gloria
After their mother was deported to Mexico, the Marin siblings faced an impossible choice: Stay or go.
By Lizzie Presser
Photographs by Diàna Markosian

Unclaimed
Two countries, thousands of families, and a 16-year quest to identify a silent man in a bed
By Brooke Jarvis
Illustrations by Jules Julien

City Limits
As mayor of Oakland, Libby Schaaf has an impossible job. Just don’t tell her that.
By Jennifer Kahn
Photographs by Erin Brethauer
HOMESHARE TWEET SUBSCRIBE
ESPN

E:60
E:60
Finding Darko
The world is quick to label Darko Milicic an epic NBA bust, but here are 10 reasons he is an utter success.
by Sam Borden
08/02/17
This story appears in Spanish here.

1. HE DOESN'T MIND TALKING ABOUT BEING A TOTAL FAILURE.

Darko Milicic uses the word "bust" a lot, which is surprising. I thought he might avoid it or at least make a sour face when it comes up, but he doesn't stumble over it, doesn't stutter. It doesn't catch in his throat like phlegm.

No, Darko is frontal. He is blunt. At 7 feet tall and approaching 300 pounds, he's roughly the size of a garage door, but, within the first 10 minutes of meeting me, he uses the word "bust" a half-dozen times in a variety of ironic ways ("This isn't just about how I'm a huge bust, right?").

He jokes about being memorably dreadful, bringing up the 2003 NBA draft when he was the second pick -- right ahead of Carmelo Anthony, Chris Bosh and Dwyane Wade, and right behind LeBron James. He pretends to be talking to those players, raising his hand in the air and telling them that, statistically, someone from the group is bound to be a nightmare so, fine, "You guys be the best and I'll be the" historical smudge mark. Then, he belly-laughs.

During our interview, which runs nearly three hours, he peppers the conversation with "bust," occasionally breaking it up with appropriate synonyms, like "disaster." At one point, he says "bust" three times in about 15 seconds and punctuates the description of his professional basketball career by stamping an imaginary label -- presumably one saying BUST -- on his own forehead. The whole thing feels like part performance art, part therapy.

The obvious question then: Was he really that bad?

The short answer: Yeah, pretty much.

There are lots of ways to quantify how much of a disappointment Darko was in the NBA (starting with the fact he averaged 6.0 points per game while making around $52 million). The simplest way to understand it, though, is this: Basketball-Reference.com has a feature where it combines all of a player's statistics and lists other players who had careers similar to his.

For LeBron, the similar players include all-time greats such as Julius Erving, Larry Bird and Charles Barkley. For Bosh, the list has Hall of Famers such as Dominique Wilkins and Alex English. Wade compares to Clyde Drexler and Walt Frazier.

Darko? His closest match is to someone named Lee Nailon, followed by Lou Amundson and Lorenzo Williams. And with all respect to those gentlemen, let's just say that none of them was drafted second and had the expectations of an entire country on his shoulders. (Two weren't even drafted at all.)

Yet Darko seems fine with all that, fine with being one of the most famous scrubs in the history of the league. Somehow, he's good with it. And so, one afternoon this spring when we are driving in Novi Sad, which is Darko's hometown in Serbia, I casually mention that I did not expect him to be so at ease with the calamitous quality of his career.

"What did you expect?" Darko asks. I hesitate. I'm trying to figure out how to say "unbridled disgrace" in a way that isn't completely offensive.

"You know, I once wrote a story about Frederic Weis," I say, bringing up another basketball catastrophe from Europe -- this one French instead of Serbian -- who was drafted by the New York Knicks in 1999 but never played a game for them. Darko's face perks up. He remembers Weis.

"What was he like?"

"He was sad and depressed," I say. "He had a lot of other issues going on, too, with his wife and his son, but he still seemed pretty angry about how everything turned out and he was angry at life, and I guess it was under-the-surface angry, but angry."

I'm babbling.

"Actually, Weis tried to kill himself once," I blurt out.

Darko doesn't flinch.

"Really?"

"Yeah."

We ride in silence for a minute. There aren't many stoplights here and the road is a little bumpy and the radio is on, with Serbian music playing low. It seems as if maybe I jabbered the conversation into submission.

But then, abruptly, Darko says, "That's weird, you know, about Weis, because I kind of feel like Old Darko died. Like, when I think about myself, or myself when I was playing, I feel like I'm sort of thinking about someone who is dead."

Darko Milicic's fellow NBA draftees in 2003 included Carmelo Anthony, Chris Bosh, Dwyane Wade and LeBron James. NATHANIEL S. BUTLER/NBAE/GETTY IMAGES
2. HE NO LONGER BELIEVES THAT, BECAUSE OF A COMBINATION OF PEER PRESSURE AND SOCIETAL CUSTOMS, HE SHOULD LIE ABOUT HIS DREAM.

Darko was 18 when the Detroit Pistons drafted him. Before that, he lived in Serbia during the 1990s, which meant he saw his country -- and his father, who was a soldier -- fight in several wars in the Balkan region. He also lived through NATO bombings that decimated his city, forcing him and his parents and his sister to spend days on end in their basement, listening to the whooshes and thumps of explosions above.

Once, during the war in Bosnia in the early '90s, as his family watched television, there was a news report about how 15 or 20 Serbian soldiers were killed that day. One of the names the newscaster read was Milorad Milicic. Darko, who wasn't even 10 yet, remembers looking up and seeing a picture of his dad on the screen.

"Why is Daddy on the TV?" he asked his mother.

His mother didn't answer. She just started crying. So Darko cried too.

But then about five minutes later, the newscaster said it was a mistake. Some of the names were wrong. "I'll never forget what that felt like," Darko says. "All of a sudden he was gone. All of a sudden he wasn't."

Milorad came home. And, among other things, he taught Darko how to play basketball, showing him shooting techniques on a hoop just down the hill from the house. It wasn't because either father or son had a particular love for the game, though. It was mostly biology.

"My father taught me because there were people from the village who said, 'You're tall -- why not try?'" Darko shrugs. "I wasn't the one that asked to play basketball."

Still, basketball turned out to be something he was good at. And because of family encouragement, and the same kind of teenage inertia that makes kids stick with the tuba for six years even though they're only sort of interested in music, Darko kept doing it. He moved to Hemofarm, a professional club in the city of Vrsac, when he was 14. Basketball became his purpose even if it wasn't his passion.

By the time scouts started coming around, Darko saw the NBA as a way out -- of financial insecurity, of persistent tumult, of Serbia -- more than any kind of childhood fantasy coming true. He liked the game enough. Everyone he met was rooting for him to go. It was all right there in front of him. And who hasn't walked through a door simply because it was open?

The problem is that wasn't the narrative we expect from foreign basketball players. We expect them to love the NBA, to have grown up watching it on choppy internet streams or satellite television, to cherish its players and aspire to its trappings. When Yao Ming came to the NBA from China, he made no secret of his longtime adoration of Arvydas Sabonis and Hakeem Olajuwon; more recently, Kristaps Porzingis, a Latvian, made it clear that Dirk Nowitzki was his inspiration, and everyone nodded.

So, as soon as Darko began to get some attention in the U.S., the expected questions began: "Who was your idol? Who did you love to watch?

Kevin Garnett, Darko answered. He told everyone that Garnett, a tall power forward with a wingspan wider than a school bus, was his muse. He told local television stations he liked Garnett. He told USA Today he liked Garnett. He told ESPN he liked Garnett.

Except he had barely seen Garnett play. "I just sort of found him and decided he's the one," Darko says now. "It seemed like the player I was supposed to like."

Supposed to -- that was Old Darko's existence, wasn't it? He was tall, so he played basketball. He was good, so he went to Hemofarm. He got noticed, so he went to America. He needed an idol, so he made one up. He followed the trail wherever it led. There was no hazy image of grandeur in his mind's eye, no sweet moment of make-believe lolling about in his brain. He was dreaming with the lights on.

Now that basketball is over, though, it is different. Now, he does fantasize about a passion. Now, he does have a picture of something that makes him smile.

Cherries.

See, Darko got into commercial farming after basketball. Some athletes do real estate or clothing -- Darko did fruit. Don't be confused: His farm is more Dole Plantation than Old MacDonald. He has 125 acres filled with apple trees and exports the apples to Dubai, Russia and countries in Africa.

Cherries, though, are his vision. The financial return on cherries is tremendous, Darko says, and the market is wide open. When Darko talks about cherries, his eyes get wide. He gets passionate. He gets animated.

"I want to make these cherries," he says during the only moment we are together when he sounds wistful. "I think it's time."


Watch Darko Milicic's story Sunday on ESPN
E:60 showcases the best in longform television journalism. For more, tune into E:60 at 9 a.m. ET on Sunday on ESPN.

3. HIS TYPICAL EVENING ROUTINE NO LONGER INCLUDES DAMAGING HIS OWN HOME.

Darko doesn't punch walls anymore. He punches heavy bags occasionally as a way to get exercise, and he once punched a horse in the face (more on that later), but his days of regularly inflicting punishment on the walls around him are over.

This is an important change. When Darko was playing in the NBA -- well, not exactly playing -- he would often return to his apartment after stewing on the bench for yet another game and channel his rage toward the typically thin, American Sheetrock walls.

The worst was in Memphis. Darko's wife, Zorana, who was living with him then, calls that his "crisis period." The team was losing. Darko was infuriated. And the walls in that apartment looked like cottage cheese, a mess of bubbly bumps and curds.

The sequence was familiar: He would come in, hammer on the walls and go to sleep. In most cities, he came to know the local contractors who could run over, throw some putty up and do a quick cover-up job with whatever paint they had handy.

"You know you have exactly white, and then the other white, and then gray?" Darko says of his patchy walls. "That was my house."

Darko had always had outbursts. He called them "going crazy." Mile Ilic, who met Darko when they were both teenagers, says sometimes Darko was just inexplicably petulant -- he would stop practicing or not want to do a drill or not think he should have to help clean up the gym -- and the coach would punish the rest of the team.

"At those moments, you simply start hating him because you have to suffer for it," Ilic says. "It would last for five or 10 minutes and then he would be a totally normal character."

By the time Darko reached the NBA, however, his emotions were more complex. At first, he was just a teenager, an ocean away from home in a culture he didn't understand. For example, Darko would go home to shower after practices or games instead of staying in the locker room to clean up; he didn't realize that in America, the players all showered together.

"So I had to teach Darko," says Chauncey Billups, who played in Detroit from 2002-08, "like, no, when we're done playing, when we're done practicing, you put your towel on and you go get in the shower. That's what we do here."

It wasn't long, though, before the naïveté melted to anger. Pistons coach Larry Brown didn't have a lot of interest in playing Darko because Detroit had received the No. 2 pick in a trade and had a slew of skilled veterans at the time. Also, when Brown did play Darko, he wanted him to work near the rim instead of passing and shooting from the outside as Darko preferred. Darko quickly plunged into a near-perpetual pout.

There was wall punching. There was also drinking, and Darko began showing up to practice still tipsy after an overnight bender. "I just wouldn't sleep," he says. It was classic high school behavior: He couldn't be the star, so he decided to be the bad-boy rebel.

"I don't have any regrets about how we treated Darko," Brown says now. "I have regrets that he couldn't have been more mature and patient."

The same thing happened in Orlando. And with Memphis, too, where Darko was so unhappy that he went off on a rant against the referees after an international game that was immortalized on YouTube. (Darko used such graphic profanity even the reporters interviewing him tried to calm him down.) "Everywhere I went, it was just the littlest thing that would set me off and I'd flip," Darko says.

You know the craziest thing? All that wall punching ... and the two times he ever broke his hand came when he was actually on the court. In Memphis, he cracked a bone in his right hand against Indiana. And in his first season, when Detroit was on the verge of winning the NBA championship over the Lakers, Brown finally put Darko in, an opponent smacked him while he was shooting a jump shot and his hand shattered.

"I was trying to show Larry Brown my hand because my hand was like shaking," Darko says. "He just pushed me back in the game."

Darko rolls his eyes when he talks about it now. He hasn't punched a wall in a while, he says, and Zorana says the same. Darko jokes that the reason is because Serbian houses are made from masonry, with textured wallpaper stuck on top of stone. The walls in Serbia don't have any give.

Zorana thinks removing the intensity of basketball from Darko's life was the key, like taking the lighter out of a gas grill. Now, she says, the sequence at night is: Darko comes in, has dinner with the family and watches television before (sometimes) dozing off on the couch.

It also isn't basketball that Darko watches. He actually does not follow the NBA much at all, he says, and he isn't kidding: I first meet Darko in June, just days after the Golden State Warriors took a 2-0 lead on the Cleveland Cavaliers (featuring LeBron) in the NBA Finals. Anyone with even a passing interest in the sport knows about the battles between LeBron and Stephen Curry.

But when I ask Darko about the series, he looks genuinely surprised. We are sitting at his farm, and Darko glances at the fields. "The Finals are going on now?" he asks. "Who is winning?"


Darko was 18 when the Pistons drafted him, and it wasn't long before he grew sullen. AP PHOTO/NIKKI BOERTMAN
4. HE KNEW WHEN TO QUIT.

On Nov. 17, 2012, the Celtics had a game against the Toronto Raptors. That day, as the players were filtering into the locker room, Darko knocked on Doc Rivers' office door.

Like most of Darko's coaches before him, Rivers did not see Darko playing a significant role on his team. To that point, through nine games, Darko had played a total of five minutes.

But Rivers liked Darko, liked having him in practice. So he welcomed Darko into his office and listened as Darko told him he had come to say goodbye.

"In the center position, if something goes bad for the team, you have [Jason] Collins, you have [Fab] Melo," Darko said. "So I'm packed and going home."

Darko recalls Rivers being stunned. "Darko, what are you talking about? Where are you going? You are going to play tonight."

Darko was unbowed. "Doc, that's it. I'm not playing tonight, I'm not playing ever again.

"Thank you guys for trying. It didn't go well. I'm out."

When Darko went into the locker room to tell his teammates, several didn't seem to understand. He was leaving? Like, for good? For good, he told them. It was over.

Publicly, the Celtics said Darko had asked for his release so he could return home to be with his mother, who was sick. In truth, Darko's mother had a minor illness -- and recovered just fine -- and Darko had been planning his exit for a while.

He first thought about leaving in Orlando, if he's being honest, when they didn't sign him to a contract extension. But Memphis gave him a $21 million contract because the Grizzlies thought they could fix him. Then, when that didn't work out, he nearly left again, but the Timberwolves -- even after he advised Minnesota not to trade for him -- dealt for him anyway and offered a $20 million contract, convinced that they, in fact, were the ones who could bring out the talent everyone was so sure Darko possessed. (They weren't.)

Finally Boston took its shot, stepping forward like the last in a line of children taking swings at an empty pinata.

"Everybody was trying to find a way to keep me," Darko says. Leaving, then, even in the way he did, was the moment when he took back control.

Is Darko a quitter? It seems too easy a label. In Darko's mind, Boston was simply the time when he decided to stop thinking everything was suddenly going to change. There was some measure of survival in it, too; over nine years, the water had risen to Darko's chin so many times it was easy to understand why he felt certain he was about to drown.

"I was so lost," Darko says. "I really came to hate basketball, you know? I just wanted to come back home and live another life."

Zorana had packed everything, and the family flew back to Serbia the day after Darko's conversation with Rivers. For a while, he felt relief. Then, he felt itchy and idle. Then he partied. Then he toyed with playing again, almost making a comeback with a Serbian team. Then he had a much-publicized midlife crisis (which is not unreasonable at age 29 when you turn professional at age 14), during which he became a kickboxer.

He fought once. On the night of the bout, Darko stepped on the scale for the prefight weigh-in and broke it. Literally broke it.

"It took us one hour to find another scale," says Darko Popivoda, the promoter of the fight. "Darko stepped on that scale, and that scale also broke." At that point, Popivoda just asked Darko how much he weighed. Over 300 pounds, Darko sheepishly said.

Things did not improve in the ring. Darko had a strong knee but says he "forgot" to use it. He had a good left high kick but kicked primarily with his right. "I mean, I want to kill him, but I don't know how," Darko says. His opponent, who was much smaller, did know how: He whaled on Darko until his legs were bleeding so badly he couldn't stand up.

Darko's family was "not really that happy" with his decision to fight, he says, and one evening, when we are chatting quietly, Zorana describes it to me as "stupidly stupid stupid." Her feelings (along with the ease with which Darko was dismantled) led Darko away from another kickboxing engagement and toward a quick second sports retirement. It seemed a wise decision.

Instead, he became intrigued by agriculture. A few friends were farmers, and that was appealing, but the element that drew Darko was the idea that he could master it. He was supposed to be a basketball wizard; that hadn't quite worked out. Farming was another chance.

Darko quickly became hooked. He traveled to Italy to look at famous orchards. He learned about soil and growing patterns and tree heights. He considered other types of fruits, then, after settling on apples, reviewed the varieties.

The juxtaposition is stark: A former basketball player doesn't know the NBA Finals is even happening, but when I ask how he monitors quality in the orchard, he walks me over to a hedge and delivers a long, winding explanation about the ideal distance each apple should be from the tree trunk. (A summary: the closer to the trunk, the better.)

Darko's passion is real. When an unexpected snowfall damaged about 10 acres of apples this spring, he went out with the workers to try to salvage the crop. And last year, when he walked through the orchard during the first picking season, he experienced a sensation that, he says, was foreign to him: pride.

"I was just really happy," he says. "You know, we were picking our apples. Ours."

video
Darko trying to find his peace in farming
Former NBA player Darko Milicic explains why he turned to farming after his professional career ended. E:60

5. WHEN HE GOES DRINKING NOW, HE USES HIS HANDS (MOST OF THE TIME).

In April 2015, Darko and his friends were at a party. There was beer. There was singing. There was lots of shouting and laughing and men raising their arms in the air. All pretty standard.

But at one point, Darko got up near the front of the crowd and, shirtless, inserted a bottle into his mouth. He then removed his hand from the side of the bottle and tipped his head backward, as if swallowing an aspirin. He remained in that position until the bottle was empty.

It was a remarkable bit of drinking agility -- one that was immortalized in a much-watched video on the internet -- even though much of the beer ended up on his neck and face and shoulders. Darko then grabbed another beer bottle but, instead of chugging it, leaned over to give gentle sips to the two Chetnik commanders he has tattooed on his torso, essentially pouring beer on his own stomach on purpose.

When I mention this video to Darko, he smiles and laughs. Then he says, "That was a long time ago." (It had been about 27 months.)

To me, there are two things that stand out from this display. The first is the prominence of Darko's tattoos. The Chetniks were a group of Serbian nationalists during World War II, and history doesn't quite agree on how cooperative, or combative, they were with the Axis forces during the war. In an effort at clarity, I ask Darko to describe himself politically -- like, why does he have those men tattooed on his stomach? -- and Darko says he is a nationalist but adds that the label doesn't mean the same thing in Eastern Europe as it might in the United States.

Darko's feelings about Serbia are complicated -- the wars, the fighting, the instability of his childhood -- but can ultimately boil down to this: He says of his country, "I love mine, and I respect others." It's a big part of the reason he moved back to Serbia instead of remaining in the United States after he had finished playing, like so many foreign athletes do. Serbia is his home.

The second thing that stands out about the video is how alone Darko looks despite being in the middle of a crowded party. His face is blank and empty. His eyes are glazed beyond the standard hammered-drunk stupor. He is in his own world. And the hands-off-the-bottle thing, while physically extraordinary, is the ultimate solo trick: It requires nothing -- not even one's own fingers as company -- to accomplish.

A few days after I first meet Darko, he has a party at his house. It is a cookout in the late afternoon, and his friends bring their wives and children. The kids jump on the trampoline. The men play (remarkably shoddy) basketball on the half court. Then there is dinner, and Darko -- in a Serbian tradition -- walks around the table with a bottle of rakia, or fruit brandy, pouring a shot for each guest and standing nearby as the guest enjoys it before moving on to the next person.

Darko does not take off his shirt. He does not let go of his glass. He does not water his tattoos. He is never alone.


The Minnesota Timberwolves offered a $20 million contract, believing they could bring out the talent everyone was so sure Darko possessed. MARC SEROTA/GETTY IMAGES
6. HE KEPT THE CARS.

In addition to teaching Darko how to shower, Billups taught Darko how to drive.

It was not always easy. In particular, Darko seemed to have a disagreement with Billups on the appropriate way to proceed from one road to another.

"I'd say, 'No Darko, hold on, you've got to slow down when you're turning,'" Billups says. "He's speeding up when he's turning, and I'm like, 'No, you can't do that.' It was scary."

Fortunately, Billups survived. Darko got his driver's license. And, shortly thereafter, he began to build a fairly remarkable collection of cars.

Over the next nine seasons, Darko spent time with the Pistons, the Orlando Magic, the Memphis Grizzlies, the New York Knicks, the Minnesota Timberwolves and the Boston Celtics. Thanks to the thick-headedness of a remarkable number of basketball executives and the wonders of the NBA's guaranteed contracts, he earned $52,323,642, and he bought a new car at nearly every stop.

Now, walking into the driveway of Darko's mansion in Novi Sad (where $52 million will last "about 200 years," Darko says), it is impossible to miss the luxury cars clumped together like pachysandra.

Over here is a Porsche Panamera with Minnesota license plates still on it. Over there is a Range Rover with New York plates. A Mercedes S600 by the turnaround? Tennessee plates from that hot mess of a stay in Memphis.

It is not entirely clear why the cars still have American license plates -- Darko makes an obscene (but funny) gesture when asked about it that seems to imply Serbian registration is, in his opinion, optional -- but there they are, gleaming symbols of Darko's misadventure in the United States stuck right out in front of his house.

Why does he keep them? Part of it might be vestiges of the old superstar lifestyle and, more likely, part of it is that there aren't many cars that are comfortable for a man so tall. But there is something more, too.

Darko moved on quickly from so much of the NBA, even selling his Pistons championship ring and donating the money to charity. The cars, though, he kept.

The Ford F-350 truck has a dark green body with a lighter green tarp stretched over the flatbed and oversized rooftop running lights. Darko says the truck isn't running now because it got damaged in a traffic accident involving Darko, a dark road, a sharp turn, fog and a herd of cows that were not as visible as one might have imagined. (Everyone was fine, including the cows.)

"I've had it priced a few times, but they tell me that even a small fix for an American truck like that is thousands," Darko says. "They try to rob me."

"Do you need it?" I ask. Darko shakes his head.

"So why not get rid of it?"

We are standing about 20 feet from the truck, and Darko gazes over at it. "Never," he says. He looks back at me as if I am crazy.

Horses have long been part of Darko's family life, and he enjoys riding. E:60
7. HE DIDN'T GO BROKE.

Darko's property in Novi Sad has a giant fence around it. There are three main buildings -- the house, the guesthouse and the indoor pool. There is also an outdoor pool, a playground, the basketball court and a covered, open-sided lounge space filled with outdoor furniture. The dining room in the guesthouse -- or, put another way, the backup dining room -- has seating for 18. The basement of the main house is Darko's hunting room, where the mounted heads of everything from deer to elk to bears peer out with hollow eyes.

Off the back of the guesthouse is a weight room that has a squat rack, leg presses, benches, fly machines and 100-pound dumbbells. There is a fire pit outside. There are 14 bicycles, tricycles and scooters lined up against a wall. Instead of a typical mudroom, there is an area that looks like a sliver of an NBA locker room, with cubbies that wouldn't seem out of place at Madison Square Garden and, on the walls, a giant picture of Darko dunking (while with the Knicks) as well as a framed Darko jersey from his time with the Timberwolves.

I mention all this because it is important to remember that Darko retired in 2012. According to one study from 2009, about 60 percent of NBA players file for bankruptcy within five years of leaving the league, and Darko -- despite his failures while in the United States -- is still flush.

On the surface, Darko's life is good: He has invested about $8 million into his apple orchard, and growth has been steady.

He has about 125 acres now, with an eye on more (plus the cherries). His kids go to a plush private school. Zorana has started her own fashion line and runs a couple of boutiques. Their compound has a staff that helps with laundry and dishes and child care.

But Darko is leery. He feels conflicted about giving his children such a lavish, easy life because he worries that they will take from it the same thing he took from being a basketball prodigy: arrogance.

That is why, when Darko's son Lazar asks Darko about basketball, Darko is honest. He doesn't tell glory-days stories (there aren't many anyway). Instead, he tells Lazar the worst parts. He talks about not playing, about mouthing off to the coaches, about not putting in extra work. He talks about his own mistakes, his foolishness. He talks about blowing his chance, even if he didn't blow his money.

"I'm not scared to tell them," Darko says one afternoon. But sometimes Lazar gets confused by what he is hearing.

"When I told him, 'Don't do everything that I did if you want to be good,'" Darko says, "he was like, 'Why? You're my father.'"

Darko shrugs. "Yeah, I'm your father," he said to Lazar, "but your father made mistakes so you don't have to."

Darko shakes his head.

"You know, he still doesn't really understand," he says. "But he's going to understand in time."

8. HE IS ABLE TO SAY "THIS IS A FUNNY STORY" (AS OPPOSED TO VIEWING IT AS A METAPHOR FOR HIS ENTIRE LIFE).

In the middle of Darko's farm is a lake. Darko had it built. It works in combination with a water treatment system that harnesses rainwater and irrigates the orchards. Above the lake is an elevated dock that includes a small (but air-conditioned) sitting room and porch where Darko can look out over his land and his water.

There are 10,000 fish in the lake, and they are mostly carp. Darko bought them and stocked the lake because "the poop and the pee are good for the apples," Darko says.

The fish are aggressive. When Darko throws food off the dock, there is a frenzy of swimming and flapping and snapping that makes the water look as if the lake also has whirlpool jets (which, to be honest, wouldn't have surprised me).

One day, Lazar says to Darko that he wants to go fishing. Lazar is adorable, a precocious 8-year-old with a soft face and lanky arms and a small dimple. He has big hands, like Darko, but a tiny and determined smile. Sometimes, when Darko is talking to someone, Lazar will just come up and lean his entire body weight against Darko's legs, nuzzling against his giant of a father.

Darko tells Lazar that fishing is no problem as there is a boat in the lake. He brings Lazar and his 5-year-old sister, Lara, up to the lake (the little brother, Luca, 4, stays home). Darko is excited -- he sees how the fish react when he throws food in the lake, and he can't wait to see Lazar's face when Lazar catches dozens of fish.

Darko and the kids get in the boat. They float away from land. They bait their hooks and drop them into the water. Nothing happens.

They move to another part of the lake. Still, nothing. Darko can't believe it. There are literally 10,000 fish in the water. He knows, because he paid for them. But not one is biting.

"Daddy, let's go," Lazar says.

"What?" Darko is flummoxed by the entire situation.

"Let's go," Lazar says again. "There are no fish here."

9. HE ACCEPTS RESPONSIBILITY.

So, the horse story.

Once, when Lazar was about 5 or 6, Darko took him riding on a big horse. Horses have forever been part of Darko's family life -- his parents had a farm, and there were always animals around -- and, even now, despite being the size of a small SUV, Darko still likes to ride. He likes that Lazar is interested in something his father enjoys.

These days, Darko rides a horse named Astor, who is a 12-year-old "really, really big horse" that the stable in Novi Sad found for him. Darko finds riding peaceful.

But on this day, it was Lazar in the saddle, and as Darko watched by the railing, the horse took off. All was fine, but then the horse began to buck and Lazar began to tremble a little bit and suddenly the boy pitched off the side of the saddle, hanging upside down alongside the horse's flank.

Darko screamed. One of Lazar's legs was caught in a stirrup. His body shook limply, banging against the horse's flanks. His tiny head dangled near the horse's hooves as the animal galloped. If Lazar fell, he would be trampled.

Darko and another man ran out into the ring, shouting. They were able to control the horse after a few seconds, but even once the horse was subdued, Darko found himself quivering. He scooped Lazar up and held him close. Lazar was crying. Darko was so scared for his son and so angry that he turned around and slugged the horse in the face. (I checked with Radoslav Bursac, who runs the stable -- the horse was fine.)

When Darko tells this story, over a traditional Serbian lunch plate of meats one day, he laughs nervously. I think it is because he knows that none of it -- the parenting, the abject fear, the animal violence -- sounds particularly good. But Darko tells the story because he sees a lesson.

When he was playing basketball, Darko says, he never thought he had done anything wrong. Everything was always someone else's problem, someone else's fault. Larry Brown didn't play him the right way. His teammates didn't realize how much he could help them. The referees screwed him.

Now though, Darko sees things differently. "I blame myself," he says of what happened to Lazar (and the horse). He shouldn't have let Lazar on that horse in the first place, and he knows that uppercutting the horse afterward was not reasonable, either.

"I didn't train him," Darko says. "It's on me."

He pauses, eating a sausage and looking out the window of the restaurant where we are eating. His face changes from stony to soft.

"After that, I asked Lazar if he wanted to ride again," Darko says. "I thought he was done. You know what he told me? 'I want to ride a bigger one.'"

More From Doubletruck
Doubletruck is the home for ESPN storytelling, a place to find great features, investigations and character portraits. Doubletruck home »

10. A SERBIAN MONK SAYS SO.

On one of my last days in Novi Sad, I go to the monastery Darko attends, which is tucked into a green nook of the Fruska Gora mountain about 25 minutes from Darko's house. The Novo Hopovo monastery is striking. Clusters of deep red roses line a path to the curved entryway. A rising church with a towering cupola shoots above the tree line and into the clouds.

The monks know Darko. He comes here often. One of them, Father Joanikije, says that one of the most important elements of Serbian Orthodox ritual is the notion of communal prayer. It is not enough to just perform the liturgy; it must be done together, and, afterward, people gather in this tranquil place and talk. Not just about religion or faith or scripture but about life. They share.

Darko never leaves early. This is where he comes for reflection and confession and expiation, and each time, he finds himself thinking about something else he should have done differently when he was playing basketball. He relives the moments that feel the worst. "You have to talk," Darko says. "When you have something inside you that's killing you, it's eating you inside, you have to talk to somebody. That's the only way you're going to take it out."

The monks see Darko differently than everyone else. When I ask Father Joanikije what he thinks of Darko as a person, he pauses for a beat or two, then says, "A man who succeeded in life. A man who achieved his goal."

The words sound odd. In all the conversations I have had with people about Darko (including with Darko himself), Father Joanikije was the only person to use that kind of language. Everyone else talks about potential lost or wasted, opportunities that weren't quite seized. Darko wasn't ready. Darko wasn't smart. Darko wasn't mature. Darko couldn't handle it. Darko rebelled. Even Darko stamped his hand on his head and said he was a bust.

But the monks see none of that. They just see a man who has a wife and children and a business and a comfortable life and a place in the community of his hometown. They see a man who achieved his goal or, at the very least, is trying to right now. So why can't they be right?

That evening, during the party at Darko's house, I watch him play basketball with his friends. He laughs and jokes, even when shots clang off the rim. No one remembers the score. In the middle of the game, Darko runs over to the fire pit to make sure his potatoes are cooking properly. He shoots with Lazar while the other players get water.

The sun sets. The players move a little slower. Darko dunks but winces afterward, rubbing his shoulder. Little Luca rides a toy motorcycle around the court. Lazar jumps on the trampoline. Zorana plays with Lara on the slide.

The game ends. The men retreat to the patio. Darko checks on the potatoes again. He says, "It's a beautiful night, right?" and turns on some Serbian music. He pours drinks for everyone and takes one for himself.

Then he sits at the head of the table. His friends shout a toast of love for each other, and for Serbia. Darko stretches his arms out and sings. The NBA feels far away, and he is not a bust tonight. Not here. The glasses clink, and the basketball rolls off into the grass.


Sam Borden
Borden is a senior writer for ESPN. He previously worked for The New York Times as a foreign correspondent based in Paris.
JEZEBEL
DEADSPIN
GIZMODO
JALOPNIK
KOTAKU
LIFEHACKER
SPLINTER
THE ROOT
VIDEO
TWSS
THE MUSE
PICTORIAL
THE SLOT
BARF BAG
SHADE COURT
DIRT BAG
DEAR JANE
All the Greedy Young Abigail Fishers and Me

Jia Tolentino
6/28/16 3:55pmFiled to: ADMISSIONS
445.5K
1.2K
167

Years ago, I helped Abigail Fishers get into college in Texas. That was my job: I “tutored” entitled teenagers through the application process. Specifically, and ominously for my later life, I taught them to write a convincing personal essay—a task that generally requires identifying some insight, usually gained over some period of growth. And growth often depends on hardship, a thing that none of these 18-year-olds had experienced in a structural sense over the course of their white young lives. Because of the significant disconnect involved in this premise, I always ended up rewriting their essays in the end.

My students were white, and without exception. Their parents were paying me $450 per session, and this was Houston; of course they were white. The means were the essays, and the end was the assurance that the benefits of whiteness would continue to vest themselves even as Texas demographics and UT admissions practices began to put their lovely families in a bind.

Texas parents—as ability permits, and like parents throughout the country—pay good money to live in good school zones. These schools are “good” in a double and mutually reinforcing sense: they are academically vibrant, supportive, and competitive; they also draw from a wealthy population, which means most of the students are white. As Abigail Fisher’s case, a.k.a. Becky With the Bad Grades v. UT Austin, reminded us: the top 7 percent (formerly 10 percent) at all Texas high schools get admitted to UT’s flagship campus automatically. This means that a second-rate student at a first-rate school, a.k.a. an Abigail Fisher, does not automatically get in. This means that a portion of white kids don’t get the educational success those property taxes were supposed to pay for. The 10 percent policy is implicit discrimination against “good schools,” the party line goes.

Most of the UT student body gets in through the Top 10 rule. The rest—approximately 8 percent, the year Fisher applied—are admitted through a holistic evaluation process, which takes into account things like extracurriculars, leadership, personal essays (thus the $450), and race. This is the part of UT admissions policy that Fisher’s case was challenging. Note that it was easier for her (or the anti-affirmative-action zealot who bankrolled her) to take a margin of UT admissions to the Supreme Court than to envision a version of justice in which she had, along with 92 percent of admitted students, straight-up earned her way in.

Because UT Austin is a terrific place—the rare kind of school that radiates both capaciousness and prestige—it is the top choice for many Texas high school students, and its unique admissions policy carries a lot of weight. It is discussed ad nauseam during application season; however, the reasoning behind this policy—behind the 10 percent rule, behind affirmative action—is not. I figured that part out only after I left the state and saw how much about my previous surroundings had been determined by the fact that rich white people can still game the system simply by living—that they are still reaping the benefits of centuries of preferential access to everything that sets a person up for success.

Today, certain measures have been enacted to level the playing field. But, as the Abigails among us can’t seem to admit, the mere existence of these measures does not mean that the need for them has expired. White people remain uniquely able, in a monetary sense, to game the system. For a summer, at $150 an hour, I was paid to help.

And I did. The kids were sweet, and I knew how to elicit and identify whatever topic would make their voice speed up when they talked about it. We wrote about canoes capsizing at summer camp, about football injuries, about girlfriends freezing us out at youth group. For the most part, they got in where they wanted, and I worked a leisurely three hours a day, helping them cheat.

I’ve had a lot of relatively demeaning jobs in my life. I never thought I deserved better than any of them—first because I didn’t, and second, because a sense of entitlement means nothing without capital to back it up. I’ve waitressed in short shorts and cowboy boots. I’ve street-canvassed for recycling. When I was 16, I was paid minimum wage to participate in a reality TV show in Puerto Rico that included challenges like eating mayonnaise on camera with my hands tied behind my back.

This job—writing college essays for Abigail Fishers—was the only job I have ever been truly ashamed of, and I am so ashamed of it now that it hurts. I did it, too, for a particularly embarrassing reason: because it paid so well that I could keep my earning hours to a minimum, and for four months spend most of my time writing fiction so I could get into an MFA program. Once I did get in, my boyfriend started looking at me reproachfully when he came home from work and saw me sending invoices. “Stop doing this,” he said flatly, in the late afternoon one day.

The first time Abigail Fisher filed a Supreme Court case because she didn’t get into college, she was 18 and reaching. She had a 3.59 GPA, an 1180 SAT score. She had not cracked her high school’s top 10 percent, and so, by the book, she did not qualify for guaranteed admission to UT. But she deserved admission nonetheless, she believed, and primarily—it appears—because she wanted it. She had “dreamt of going to UT ever since the second grade,” she said, in a 2012 video. Her dad had gone there, and so had her sister, and so had “tons” of friends and family. “It was a tradition I wanted to continue,” she said. For Fisher, basic competence and a powerful sense of unexamined entitlement was admissions criteria enough.

Fisher’s temperament—this exact sort of greedy placidity—made her an ideal figurehead for Edward Blum, the University of Texas graduate (’73, hook ’em!) who is bankrolling her case. Blum, who is white, runs an organization called the Project on Fair Representation, which takes on the noble work of arranging legal representation to fight race-based policies aimed at combating inequity. Blum took the underlying, incorrect instinct that is latent in people like Fisher and turned it into the basis of a court case: Fisher went from a tautological belief (“I deserve to be admitted because I deserve to be admitted”) to a frankly insane one—that she deserved admission because she’d been discriminated against, and specifically, discriminated against for being white.



From the above YouTube video:

There were people in my class with lower grades who weren’t in all the activities I was in, who were being accepted into UT, and the only other difference between us was the color of our skin. [...] I was taught from the time I was a little girl that any kind of discrimination was wrong. For an institution of higher learning to act this way makes no sense to me. What kind of example does it set for others? [...] A good start to stopping discrimination would be getting rid of the boxes on applications—male, female, race, whatever.
This is that familiar type of “I don’t care whether you’re black, white, blue or spotted” language that’s generally associated with the type of person who has only ever thought of race as something (1) bad that (2) belongs to other people, and has just now realized that her own race can be named. It is also, essentially, what Justice Roberts wrote in 2007, in his claim that the days of race being constitutionally relevant are behind us: “The way to stop discrimination on the basis of race is to stop discriminating on the basis of race.”

But, while Fisher’s Supreme Court case was about race, her actual admissions case was barely. The fact of the matter was that she simply did not have the grades. Nikole Hannah-Jones wrote in ProPublica in 2013: “University officials claim in court filings that even if Fisher received points for her race and every other personal achievement factor, the letter she received in the mail still would have said no.”

It’s true that the university, for whatever reason, offered provisional admission to some students with lower test scores and grades than Fisher. Five of those students were black or Latino. Forty-two were white.

Neither Fisher nor Blum mentioned those 42 applicants in interviews. Nor did they acknowledge the 168 black and Latino students with grades as good as or better than Fisher’s who were also denied entry into the university that year. Also left unsaid is the fact that Fisher turned down a standard UT offer under which she could have gone to the university her sophomore year if she earned a 3.2 GPA at another Texas university school in her freshman year.
That last detail, to me—like all of this—feels damning and familiar. Again: Fisher could have gone to UT Austin if she’d just waited out a year at another UT campus. But to a certain type of person in Texas, this is a possibility as shameful as rehab. It’s for people who have not maintained the advantage that was given them, or for people who never had that advantage in the first place. Trashy people, lots of non-whites. There’s no Greek scene to speak of at UT Permian Basin or what have you, anyway.

UT Permian Basin, by the way, is 43 percent Hispanic, where UT Austin is 22 percent Hispanic; UT Dallas is 24 percent international, where UT Austin is 5 percent international; UT Arlington is 15 percent black, where UT Austin is 5 percent black. There is a reason that Fisher didn’t want to go elsewhere and transfer back in. Texas is segregated; its schools are segregated; this segregation extends to the UT system. Those other schools are worse, academically, than Austin, and they are way less full of white people, and those two facts are one and the same.

And so the UT Austin admissions policy is essential. It’s not perfect—the 10 percent rule is unduly tough on kids in small-town public schools who graduate in a class of 20, for example—but it nonetheless does a good job of adding some structural decency to a public educational system that functions quite well for wealthy white people and much worse for everyone else. The school knows from recent experience that, if you remove the ability to correct for and consider structural inequality, you will immediately increase it: in 1996, the ability to take race into account in Texas state school admissions was removed by Hopwood v. Texas, and black admissions to UT Austin fell by 40 percent. (Hopwood was effectively overturned by the Supreme Court’s Michigan decision in 2003.)

The 10 percent rule was created as a correction after Hopwood, and it worked, but only to a point. Minority admissions increased, and then they stopped increasing. The 10 percent rule, remember, is “race-neutral.” As a diversity practice, it is necessarily incomplete. In a Supreme Court ruling on UC Davis in 1971, Justice Blackmun wrote:

I suspect that it would be impossible to arrange an affirmative action program in a racially neutral way and have it successful. To ask that this be so is to demand the impossible. In order to get beyond racism, we must first take account of race. There is no other way. And in order to treat some persons equally, we must treat them differently. We cannot—we dare not—let the Equal Protection Clause perpetuate racial supremacy.
This is why, after the 2003 Supreme Court ruling, UT started considering race for the students admitted outside the top 10 percent. And, because so many of the automatically admitted students go elsewhere, this policy affects more of the matriculating population than it does the population the school admits. NPR wrote: “In 2008 when Fisher applied, 20 percent of the incoming class was admitted under the ‘holistic’ admission plan that could consider race. According to the university, that 20 percent is essential to the student body as a whole.”

How can Abigail Fisher and her dream school hold such diametrically opposed opinions? The difference comes down to a very old question about whether a person is obligated to do anything to right an injustice that they did not personally commit. I would argue, as you might expect, that we are obligated to do so. Nikole Hannah-Jones put it elegantly for the New York Times Magazine: “True integration, true equality, requires a surrendering of advantage,” she wrote.

The trouble is that it is often up to white people to demonstrate this, because they have so much more advantage to surrender; the further trouble is that there are so many Abigail Fishers out there, who not only refuse to surrender advantage but refuse to understand that they have it in the first place, who often then—magnificently—go so far as to say they are being disadvantaged whenever their race is accounted for and named.

I always forget, too, that there’s a line of argument, as referenced by Alito in Becky v. UT Austin, contending that race-based admissions policies hurt Asian students. I was aware of this idea in high school, even as people around me told me (not that I asked) that affirmative action would get me in everywhere I applied. And I didn’t get in everywhere; I got rejected by Harvard, for example—a school that has recently been sued by Asian-American students for “illegally” capping Asian-American admissions. That lawsuit was funded by none other than Edward Blum, and tellingly, it was disowned by many Asian students on campus. Maybe they didn’t want to be associated with insecure white racists. Maybe they, like me, were fine with the hypothetical idea of losing out due to a quota that was never about them. And there, dear Abby, is the real way non-whiteness gives you the advantage: you gain the moral clarity that comes from having less to lose.

To be against affirmative action, you have to be some combination of dumb, selfish, or deeply indoctrinated. (A personal favorite of mine is the “I don’t want black students hearing [exclusively from people like me] that they only got in because of affirmative action” argument.) What Abigail Fisher was fighting against is the idea that a public college might want to note that a student is black or Hispanic in Texas, a state where the governor was actively opposed to desegregation during the civil rights movement, where the structure of financing public school systems was ruled racially discriminatory by a State Supreme Court decision as late as 1989. She was fighting against the idea that a college might then extrapolate the logical conclusion that, perhaps, that black or Hispanic kid, almost surely coming from a worse school district than the white person whose application showed the same academic statistics, might have possibly had to work a little bit harder than her equivalent Abigail Fisher.

That, to Abigail Fisher—because she worked hard and is a nice white person whose parents have always had burnt-orange Longhorn pot holders hanging on the grill in their nice neighborhood with nice schools made possible by nice FHA policies that made possible a life in 2016 in which “diversity” could seem like a value that would hurt white people rather than assuage whatever it is in their soul that makes them this way—is wrong. Some proof that American discrimination is still quite high-functioning is available in the fact that Abigail Fisher went to the Supreme Court with an idea of the concept that centrally applied to her.

I have heard so many Abigails tell me that UT’s policy is reverse racism. I sat across from white girls in oversized T-shirts, white boys in basketball shorts, sweet kids with good hearts and sleep still in their eyes, who told me—either very nicely or very snidely, never anything in between—that it was harder for white people to get into college now than anyone else, because of affirmative action. They said this as their parents wrote me $450 checks to “edit” their essays. They said this to me, the living proof that there is still so much to be compensated for—the minority literally paid to help get them into school.

That 1989 Texas State Supreme Court decision, Edgewood v. Kirby, gave rise to legislation that was informally called the Robin Hood plan, in which some property tax revenue from wealthy, white school districts would be redistributed to poorer, non-white school districts. (That plan was revised in 2005, to our detriment.) And at the time I was writing essays for Abigail Fishers, this scheme—a Robin Hood scenario—is sometimes how I thought about what I was doing. I was fleecing the rich, and giving to the poor, by which I meant myself, fresh out of Peace Corps with an empty bank account. I had tried to do good and had lost my understanding of what good was; I deserved to get away with something, I think I had come to believe.

It took me until some time later to realize what is so obvious to me now, why my boyfriend hated my job so much, which was that I was the one letting the Abigails get away with everything. That I was feeding and affirming and making possible the entitlement of mediocre white high schoolers, many of whom believed themselves to be facing structural discrimination, and needed to hire a ghostwriter to stay on top. Luckily, they could afford to. Luckily, I liked them when they weren’t talking about affirmative action. Luckily, we all made out just fine in the end.

We were all lucky, weren’t we? In 2005, I applied to college—not in the Philippines or Canada, where my parents had gone, but in America. I was salutatorian at my high school; I had perfect SATs. I was a cheerleader, the editor of our yearbook, cast in every musical, an officer in every club. And still, when I got into colleges, I felt lucky. I never felt like I’d simply gotten what I deserved.

In fact I still don’t know what it would be like to feel automatically deserving of something, to have enough of a claim on advantage to give a fuck about giving it up. I have never had a case for any sort of admission, not even when I was a selfish high schooler, not even when it came to the 10 percent rule, because even when I opened my Texas acceptance letter I knew some Abigail Fisher would think that if anyone was coasting on race here, it was me. How the legacy of inequity took hold of me internally even as I clawed through it with a sunny disposition was not obvious to me then, or in college, or after I graduated, on a hot summer where I needed money and I couldn’t ask my parents and I felt lucky—lucky—to be helping Abigail Fishers cheat.

Illustration by Jim Cooke
Jia Tolentinojia@jezebel.com@jiatolentino
Deputy Editor, Jezebel
Want Jezebel’s email newsletter?

Add your email address
Subscribe
You may also like
Jezebel
What Is the Use of Addressing a Headline to Men?
6/06/16 10:35am
Jezebel
How to Bleach Your Black Hair Blonde in Just 6 Hours and For a Mere Few Million Bucks
6/14/16 2:15pm
Jezebel
Interview With a Woman Who Recently Had an Abortion at 32 Weeks
6/15/16 11:30am
ShareTweet
Want Jezebel’s email newsletter?

Add your email address
Subscribe
About Blog
Need Help?
Content Guide
Jezebel Store
Permissions
Privacy
Terms of Use
Advertising
Jobs
RSS
©2017 Gizmodo Media Group
HomeSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO NAVIGATIONVIEW MOBILE VERSION The New York Times
Share

Cover PhotoCredit Photo Illustration by Todd McLellan
Losing It in the Anti-Dieting Age
The agonies of being overweight — or running a diet company — in a culture that likes to pretend it only cares about health, not size.

BY TAFFY BRODESSER-AKNERAUG. 2, 2017
James Chambers was watching membership sign-ups on Jan. 4, 2015, like a stock ticker — it was that first Sunday of the year, the day we all decide that this is it, we’re not going to stay fat for one more day. At the time, he was Weight Watchers’ chief executive, and he sat watching, waiting for the line on the graph to begin its skyward trajectory. Chambers knew consumer sentiment had been changing — the company was in its fourth year of member-recruitment decline. But they also had a new marketing campaign to help reverse the generally dismal trend. But the weekend came and went, and the people never showed up. More than two-thirds of Americans were what public-health officials called overweight or obese, and this was the oldest and most trusted diet company in the world. Where were the people? Weight Watchers was at a loss.

Chambers called Deb Benovitz, the company’s senior vice president and global head of consumer insights. ‘‘We’re having one of the worst Januaries that anyone could have imagined,’’ she remembers him telling her. In the dieting business, January will tell you everything you need to know about the rest of the year. ‘‘Nothing like we had anticipated.’’ Chambers and Benovitz knew that people had developed a kind of diet fatigue. Weight Watchers had recently tried the new marketing campaign, called ‘‘Help With the Hard Part,’’ an attempt at radical honesty. No one wanted radical honesty. Chambers told Benovitz that they needed to figure out what was going on and how to fix it before the February board meeting.

Benovitz got to work. She traveled the country, interviewing members, former members and people they thought should be members about their attitudes toward dieting. She heard that they no longer wanted to talk about ‘‘dieting’’ and ‘‘weight loss.’’ They wanted to become ‘‘healthy’’ so they could be ‘‘fit.’’ They wanted to ‘‘eat clean’’ so they could be ‘‘strong.’’

If you had been watching closely, you could see that the change had come slowly. ‘‘Dieting’’ was now considered tacky. It was anti-feminist. It was arcane. In the new millennium, all bodies should be accepted, and any inclination to change a body was proof of a lack of acceptance of it. ‘‘Weight loss’’ was a pursuit that had, somehow, landed on the wrong side of political correctness. People wanted nothing to do with it. Except that many of them did: They wanted to be thinner. They wanted to be not quite so fat. Not that there was anything wrong with being fat! They just wanted to call dieting something else entirely.

Continue reading the main story
A study out of Georgia Southern University’s Jiann-Ping Hsu College of Public Health, published in The Journal of the American Medical Association in March, monitored attitudes toward losing weight over three periods between 1988 and 2014. In the first period, 1988-94, 56 percent of fat adults reported that they tried to lose weight. In the last period, 2009-14, only 49 percent said so.

The change had been spurred not just by dieting fatigue but also by real questions about dieting’s long-term efficacy. In Weight Watchers’ own research, the average weight loss in any behavior-modification program is about a 5 percent reduction of body weight after six months, with a return of a third of the weight lost at two years. There were studies that appeared to indicate that the cycle of weight loss and weight gain could cause long-term damage to the metabolism. Those studies led to more studies, which suggested that once your body reaches a certain weight, it is nearly impossible to exist at a much lower weight for an extended period of time. Even more studies began to question whether or not it’s so bad to be fat in the first place; one notably suggested that fatter people lived longer than thin ones.

These questions began to filter into the mainstream. Women’s magazines started shifting the verbal displays on their covers, from the aggressive hard-body stance of old to one with gentler language, acknowledging that perhaps a women’s magazine doesn’t know for sure what size your body should be, or what size it can be: Get fit! Be your healthiest! GET STRONG! replaced diet language like Get lean! Control your eating! Lose 10 pounds this month! In late 2015, Women’s Health, a holdout, announced in its own pages that it was doing away with the cover phrases ‘‘drop two sizes’’ and ‘‘bikini body.’’ The word ‘‘wellness’’ came to prominence. People were now fasting and eating clean and cleansing and making lifestyle changes, which, by all available evidence, is exactly like dieting.

Diet companies suffered for being associated with dieting. Lean Cuisine repositioned itself as a ‘‘modern eating’’ company, not a diet company. In fact, Lean Cuisine went so far in their pivot that in 2016 they introduced a Google Chrome extension that would filter mentions of the word ‘‘diet’’ and ‘‘dieting’’; it apparently did this to show that just because it was called Lean Cuisine, that didn’t mean it was a diet company. You can’t be held responsible for what your parents named you!

Weight Watchers saw all this happening and concluded that people didn’t have faith in diets. The company decided that what it offered was not a diet program but a lifestyle program. It was a behavior-modification program. (For the sake of expediency here, I will call its program a diet because it prescribes amounts of food.) When Deb Benovitz returned from her travels with news of dieting’s new language changes, the company realized that something had to change more than its marketing approach.

Weight Watchers’ chief science officer is Gary Foster, a psychologist — the first in that position, which previously had been held by dietitians. What he and his team realized from Benovitz’s research was that dieters wanted a holistic approach to eating, one that helped really change their bodies, yes, but in a way that was sustainable and positive. He got to work creating a new approach that would become known as Beyond the Scale: He used all available mind-body research to try to figure out a way for members to appreciate benefits of the program besides weight loss. This would help them stay on the program during setbacks and beyond their weight-loss period and allow the program to infiltrate their lives beyond mealtime and beyond plain old eating suggestions.

The company would move away from giving its members goal weights. It expanded its cognitive-behavioral strategies, which taught members to challenge unhelpful thinking and to respond to their emotions with reason, as opposed to with food or despair. It developed workshops that used meditation and qigong and didn’t once mention food or weight. It updated its apps and introduced a social-media program, Connect. It became as holistic-minded as the people told Benovitz they wanted a program to be.

But Weight Watchers was still a company called Weight Watchers, and it had to figure out a way to communicate all of this change to the public. People had too many associations with the brand. It needed someone other than the usual celebrity spokesdieter, a fat famous person who could be paid somewhere between $250,000 and $2 million to do the talk show circuit and People covers for a year. It needed someone who could fast-track the message that it was worth taking a new look at Weight Watchers.

When the company called Oprah Winfrey in July 2015, she was standing on the lawn of her home in Maui with a sprained ankle, an injury she sustained while hiking in the mountains. In the month since her convalescence began, she had gained 17 pounds. Her struggles with weight were, at this point, a cultural meme. How could you explain the failure of someone so goal-oriented and successful — someone so successful that her name was invoked as a symbol of success as often as it was ever used to summon her? Weight Watchers had reached out to her in the past, but she politely declined. This time she bought a 10 percent stake in the company for $43 million, and Weight Watchers stockholders rejoiced.

But the verbal changes around dieting had indicated something deeper than just a marketing issue; they pointed straight back to the fatigue that was hurting Weight Watchers in the first place. So, yes, many people celebrated the new partnership. But others — meaning, anyone who for a majority of their lives had been watching Oprah cycle up and down through different sizes — felt a little confused by the move. What was Oprah, a person whose very brand meant enlightenment and progress, doing on another diet? It was hard not to suspect that she was trapped, like so many of us are, in a culture that says one thing about fatness and means something very different.

Share Your Story About Dieting and Weight Loss
Have you struggled with weight over the years? If so, how has this struggle impacted your relationship with food, and with people? Share your story with us. A selection of reader submissions will be published in the coming days.
This form is no longer accepting submissions.

Back in 1963, when Jean Nidetch held the first what-would-be-known-as-Weight-Watchers meetings above a movie theater in Queens, things seemed clearer: It was bad to be fat, and it was good to be thin, and fat people wanted to be thin, and thin people wanted to help them get there. Her memoirs, ‘‘The Story of Weight Watchers,’’ reads about as current as a cigarette ad featuring smoking babies. ‘‘If strawberry shortcake made you break out in purple spots, you wouldn’t eat it,’’ she wrote. ‘‘You’d be allergic to it. But, do you think fat is prettier than purple spots? It’s uglier and harder to get rid of.’’

Its frankness seems like an anachronism now, but you have to consider that at the time, this kind of straight talk was a glass of cold water in the desert for many fat people, who privately wondered why it was so hard for them to reduce the size of their bodies when it seemed so effortless for the people who walked around thin. Nidetch lost her weight in her late 30s, after a lifetime of self-loathing and embarrassment; the last indignity was the time someone asked when her baby was due when she was definitively not pregnant. She went to a city-run obesity clinic, and when she left the program, she kept the diet it gave her. She mimeographed it and handed it out to people whom she had gathered to spread the word about how weight loss could provide freedom and hope. (The diet would evolve from an eating plan to a more democratic system of balanced exchanges to an absolute laissez-faire system of points, as the company realized that the more autonomy and the less deprivation people experienced in their dieting — limitless choices, if not limitless amounts — the more likely they’d be to stay on the diet.) But Nidetch knew that it wasn’t just the food that was the problem; it was the problem that was the problem. What fat people needed was one another. They needed a space in which they could talk openly about the physical struggles and daily humiliations of walking around in a fat body, and just how much that sucked.

These same ideas were articulated more starkly a few years later, but with a different prescription. In 1967, a fat man named Lew Louderback unleashed an essay in The Saturday Evening Post arguing that the wisdom around thinness could be applied only to thin people — that fat people suffered physically and psychologically when trying to maintain thin-person weights, and that this maintenance seemed to be temporary at best and largely destructive emotionally.

He went on to write a book called ‘‘Fat Power,’’ which helped give birth to what would become known as the fat-acceptance movement. That movement has varying degrees of militancy, but generally asks the public to put aside its bias and learn something new — to not think of fat people as lazy; to not deny them medical care; to not exclude them from their basic rights. It suggests that we re-examine what we think we know about fatness, that we consider trying to love and care for our bodies at whatever size they are now.

Photo

Jean Nidetch, founder of Weight Watchers, in 1972.
Credit Martha Holmes/LIFE Images Collection/Getty Images
There were more books and more essays and more challenges to the status quo in the decades to come. In 2008, Linda Bacon, a researcher who holds graduate degrees in physiology, psychology and exercise science with a specialty in nutrition, wrote a seminal fat-acceptance book, ‘‘Health at Every Size: The Surprising Truth About Your Weight,’’ which used peer-reviewed research to bolster these ideas. She gave seminars to doctors on fat phobia and weight bias in an effort to help them understand how their views on obesi­ty were hurting their patients and not allowing them to examine fatness neutrally. For example, there is evidence that stress and discrimination play a strong role in the insulin resistance and diabetes and heart disease for which weight typi­cally takes the blame.

With the rise of social media, the movement began to infiltrate the culture in other ways, too. Fat-acceptance and body-positivity activists began posting pictures of themselves on Instagram — just regular pictures, defiant for their lack of apology. There were intuitive-eating workshops and body-positivity training camps. There were bloggers and authors asking exactly how much of your life you were willing to put off in pursuit of a diet, or until you got to a certain weight, even temporarily. Normal, nonmilitant, nonactivist people began asking themselves if it was that bad to be fat — if it was that unhealthy, or that ugly, to be fat. And yet the most telling thing about the way the fat-acceptance movement is received in our society may be that its Wikipedia entry contains two quotes from people criticizing it before it mentions even one person who espouses it. In this world, we are witness to a moment when the word “optimal” is used in conjunction with the word “body,” when people are trying to mold themselves into high-performance, precision machines. The idea of a fat machine makes no sense when you are easily fueled and refueled on Whole Foods and Soylent.

In other words, all this activism didn’t make the world more comfortable with fat people or dieting. Society doesn’t normally change the words for things unless we’re fundamentally uncomfortable with the concepts beneath them. Consider the verbal game of chicken we’ve played with the people all this affects: Fat people went from being called fat (which is mean) to being called overweight (a polite-seeming euphemism that either accidentally or not accidentally implies that there is a standard weight) to being called zaftig/chubby/pleasingly plump (just don’t) to curvy (which seems to imbue size with a sexuality and optimism where it should just be sexually and emotionally neutral) and back to fat (because it’s only your judgment of fat people that made it a bad word in the first place, and maybe being fat isn’t as bad as we’ve been made to believe). It bears mentioning that Weight Watchers doesn’t have a standardized word for its demographic, but Foster uses the term ‘‘people with overweight.’’

As the ideas that sprang from the fat-acceptance movement began to trickle into the mainstream, fat people began to wonder what it might be like to put all this aside and just live their lives. Some asked themselves if they thought they could figure out a way to not want to be thin; some began to ask themselves if they actually liked the way they looked. They began to wonder if there was even a proven and effective way to become and stay thin anyway. They began to ask themselves if they should be dieting at all.

Continue reading the main story
Continue reading the main story
THE FADDISH AND SOMETIMES QUESTIONABLE HISTORY OF AMERICAN WEIGHT LOSS

Photo

La Parle Obesity Soap | 1903 CreditThe Advertising Archives
Photo

Lucky Strike Cigarettes | 1929 CreditStanford Research Into the Impact of Tobacco Advertising
Photo

Domino Sugar | 1950s CreditThe Advertising Archives
Photo

Ayds Diet Candy | 1970s CreditThe Advertising Archives
Photo

Metrecal Shakes | 1969 CreditThe Jim Heimann Collection/Taschen
Photo

Slim-Fast Shakes | 2004 CreditThe Advertising Archives
Last fall, I was with Foster, Weight Watchers’ chief science officer, as he walked the halls of Obesity Week, the annual conference of the Obesity Society. The conference includes study presentations, each one a possible clue to the mystery of fatness. We attended a presentation on a new study of a weight-loss medication. People on the medication lost weight, but once they were off, the weight came back. If only we could get people’s weight down, the presenters said, they could have a fresh start. Out in the hall, Foster shook his head. ‘‘There’s a bias and a stigma: ‘We’ll give these people medication for a short period, but then they’ve got to fly straight and get will power.’ It’s nonsense. This tough love — I’m going to be hard on myself — you know, in some perverse way, if it were true, we might try to leverage it, but it’s not. The harder you are on yourself, the worse you do.’’ In his career before Weight Watchers, Foster was the founder and director of the Center for Obesity Research and Education at Temple University. Neutralizing the morality talk and stigma that surround obesity, he says, would make it a lot easier to figure out how to deal with it.

By the time of the conference, the Oprah-Weight Watchers partnership had proved a clear success. Within a year, the company was up to 2.8 million members; by the first quarter of 2017 it would be 3.6 million. Oprah had brought an audience to Beyond the Scale, the holistic model Foster helped create. He says that initial weight loss on the program in 2016 was up 15 percent from what it was the year before. Of course people should want to manage their weight, he said, the same way they’d want to manage their diabetes. ‘‘It would seem preposterous if we would say to people with diabetes, ‘Don’t manage your diabetes.’ ’’ Or their asthma. All three are chronic conditions; why, he asks, would we assume we should give up on weight? When people lose weight, he points out, they see improvements in risk factors. Data is data. Modifying your eating is hard, he says, but it’s worth it. No one can tell you that lowering weight doesn’t also lower other health factors like hypertension and high cholesterol and joint pain.

Maybe that’s true. Most mainstream sources agree on this, but there are definitely some researchers who don’t; there are some who think that people who end up fat have different physiologies, and that fatness is just one component of them. Consider the ‘‘uptick,’’ as Foster calls it, that comes after two years on a diet when, say, the person who lost 5 percent of her weight has gained a third of it back. Think about those numbers. If you weigh 300 pounds, you will lose 15 pounds in six months. You’ll keep it off for a year or two, maybe. Five pounds is likely to return. Of course, these are people who don’t stay on a diet-maintenance plan; but the average dieter certainly doesn’t, and it’s worth it to ask why a person wouldn’t stay on a program that offered such rewards. Is it because they couldn’t? It’s worth it to ask if the programs are right and all these humans trying very hard at them are wrong. And also, where are the 300-pound people who want to lose just 15 pounds in the first place? I haven’t met those people. But mainly, what it comes down to is this: Weight Watchers is designed to be successful only if you can stay on Weight Watchers forever.

And there were also questions about dieting’s long-term effects on the body. A study done by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, which is part of the National Institutes of Health. The study followed contestants who had appeared on the eighth season of ‘‘The Biggest Loser,’’ all of whom had normal resting metabolisms for their size when the season began. As the contestants experienced radical, sweeps-week weight loss, their metabolisms slowed, and stayed slow afterward. To maintain his weight loss, one contestant’s resting metabolism now required 800 calories fewer per day than a man of his size. It might be that when you have been fat, your body doesn’t behave the way a thin body does, even when you become thinner.

Foster shook his head at that one. He hears about the ‘‘Biggest Loser’’ study a lot, but he doesn’t think it conveys accurate information. It uses a very small sample under extreme conditions. He cited his own and others’ studies examining the metabolic rate, fat distribution and psychological state of people before they lose weight, after they lose weight and after they regain the weight. ‘‘Nothing is changed,” he said. ‘‘I’m not saying that’s a good outcome or something we should celebrate — but this idea that the act of managing your weight and losing weight has somehow set you up to be in a worse spot just isn’t borne out by the science.’’

Here is the thing about this particular debate at this particular moment: Everyone has much the same data, but there are plenty of people who would interpret the data differently from the way Foster does. I’ve spoken to countless (I literally stopped keeping count) obesity researchers and dietitians and biologists and doctors. The answer becomes one of point of view: Is fat inherently bad, or can it be neutral?

We can’t answer that yet. There is still too much debate. So in the meantime, a fat person has to consider the data she has access to — meaning studies, yes, but also her own experience and the experience of her fat peers — and ask: Do you believe that you, a fat person, can ever be meaningfully thinner for a meaningful amount of time? Is a diet successful if it stops being successful once you’re done with it? I’ve interviewed Foster before. Back in 2011, when he was at Temple, he published a study about the efficacy of different kinds of diets. They all led to similar losses, and they all led to similar rates of recidivism. When I spoke with him back then, I asked him why we should continue dieting if the outcomes were so bad. He was concerned that I would suggest to my readers that dieting wasn’t worth it. He told me that people didn’t need that kind of discouragement. This attitude is what makes him so credible to me — his message was the same long before he worked for a corporation — but it’s also what makes this so depressing.

I do not recommend being a fat person at Obesity Week. Over the years, the event has become a week long, and it contains a robust trade show. After Foster left me to go to a meeting, I walked the trade-show floor and saw all the products being shown to the obesity specialists in attendance. I watched a video of a new kind of retractor that will more easily hold open belly skin while part of a stomach is cut out and sewn up, because you can’t eat as much if your stomach is made smaller. I watched a person showing a model of a balloon you’d insert into the stomach of a patient that would take up volume so that she wouldn’t be so hungry, to be removed later once her behavior had been modified. I drank a smoothie with a superfood ingredient I can’t pronounce or remember while someone told me that my readers would really be interested in their something-metrics plan for hydration and portion control. I narrowed my eyes thoughtfully because it felt rude to be drinking this guy’s smoothie without taking him seriously. ‘‘There’s no such thing as magic, Taffy,’’ the smoothie man was saying. I nodded in solemn agreement.

Before he left me, I told Foster that Obesity Week made me sad. First, it was the profusion of educated people in the room studying me and my people as if we were problems to solve. But second, it was because if you have this many hundreds of smart and educated people trying to figure this out, and nobody has anything for me but superfood and behavior modification and an insertable balloon and the removal of an organ, it must be that there is no way to solve fatness.

Foster doesn’t see it that way, he told me. ‘‘I look around this room,’’ he said, ‘‘and I see hope.’’

Photo

Oprah Winfrey on her show in 1988, with a wagon of fat to represent the 67 pounds she lost while on Optifast.
Credit Charles Bennet/Associated Press
By the time Oprah announced that she was signing on with Weight Watchers, I was celebrating my 25th anniversary of my first diet, at age 15, which I found in an issue of Shape magazine. I was 5-foot-3 and weighed 110 pounds. In the intervening years, I did cleanses and had colonics and refilled the prescriptions on three rounds of those diet pills that made my teeth sweat and ate two shakes for lunch and just protein and just good carbs (carbs are divided into good and bad, like witches in Oz) and just liquid and just fruit until dinnertime and just food the size of my fist and two glasses of lukewarm lemon water. I had stood up in a room and said, ‘‘Hello, my name is Taffy, and I am a compulsive overeater.’’ I had stuck my finger down my throat, a shot in the dark that I hoped would be more sustainable than it was. I had South Beached, I had Atkinsed, I had Slim-Fasted. Put it this way: The Amazon algorithm recently recommended to me, based on my previous searches, a book-and-CD combination, ‘‘Hypnotic Gastric Band: The New Surgery-Free Weight-Loss System,’’ which offered a hypnotic equivalent to bariatric surgery. Put it this way: When I arrived at Weight Watchers, despite the fact that I was there as a journalist, I registered for the diet under the ra­tion­ale that this was experiential journalism. When I gave my name at the counter, the person registering me furrowed her brow and said: ‘‘That’s strange. There are three other people named Taffy Akner.’’ I said, ‘‘No, those are all me.’’

‘‘In Brooklyn?’’

‘‘Yes, when I was in high school.’’

‘‘In Los Angeles?’’

‘‘Yes, right before I was married.’’ I stopped her before she could go on. ‘‘They’re all me.’’

The New York Times Magazine
The best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week, including exclusive feature stories, photography, columns and more.

Sign Up
SEE SAMPLE PRIVACY POLICY OPT OUT OR CONTACT US ANYTIME
By then I was all in, as if I ever hadn’t been. When I arrived at the Union, N.J., meeting at 8 a.m. on a Saturday, it was a few weeks before Thanksgiving. Thanksgiving is marketed as a fun, festive holiday of family gathering, but everyone at that meeting knew the truth: Thanksgiving is an existential threat. Thanksgiving is a killer.

The year leading up to Thanksgiving hadn’t been much better for this group. There had been family deaths and illness. There had been foreclosures and unemployments and high-school reunions, and someone’s daughter was always baking sticky buns; someone’s husband wanted to know where his steak was; someone’s son wanted to know why the meatloaf tasted different; someone’s co-worker was always leaving doughnuts and bagels on the communal table at the office. The people, mostly women, in the folding chairs had one rule, though: No matter what happened during the week, you showed up. ‘‘This is my church,’’ a woman named Donna told me. A few months before, she buried her mother on a Friday; on Saturday she came to the meeting.

Dayna, the group leader, stood at the head of the room. How could you not love Dayna? She took such care with her appearance — she wore tall boots and wrap dresses and makeup, even on Saturday mornings when everyone else wore sweatpants at best (or leggings; leggings weigh less). She gave them star-shaped stickers off a large roll when they lost weight or when they had acted in their best interests over the week. She remembered their names, even the ones who hadn’t shown up in months; she gave them hugs.

Today, Donna had gained weight. She had been holding steady at six pounds short of her goal. Since 2009 — 2009 — she had shown up every week and by now had lost 132 pounds, which is an entire other Donna. But these last six pounds, my God, what would it take? She’d been down last week by a pound, and now that pound was back. She’d been going to the gym ‘‘religiously’’ for two weeks, but thought maybe the not going to the gym three weeks ago had caught up with her. Sometimes being six pounds away from her goal was harder than being 321 pounds.

‘‘I’m so frickin’ aggravated,’’ she said. She asked me how I did. I shrugged and told her I had lost three pounds. ‘‘But I just started, so, . . . ’’ I said. I didn’t want her to feel bad. Another woman, Amy, whispered to me, ‘‘You never want to say ‘I only lost, . . . ’ because then everyone will go, ‘Oh, jeez.’ ’’

I asked the women there, most of whom were repeat joiners as well: Shouldn’t we be moving toward acceptance? Here we all were — smart, accomplished, successful women (and one man) — and we couldn’t maintain what was proved to be the most effective diet you could ever try. If we couldn’t stay on this, could we stay on anything? What if the flaw wasn’t in us but in the system?

They furrowed their brows and shook their heads and gave me funny looks. What was I talking about? How could a fat person not want to be thin? Donna’s sisters were all on diabetes medication, and she wasn’t. Her back had hurt until about 20 pounds ago, and now she could crawl on the floor with her grandson as if it were nothing.

I couldn’t counter very hard. Each time I came to a meeting, I was seduced by the possibility, by the clean, Calvinist logic, that if you ate less you would weigh less, that your body would feed on itself and its fat reserves until you became smaller and smaller and more pleasing to the world and its standards — until you practically disappeared (we are a culture that fetishizes something called Size 0). I looked forward to these meetings, feeling as if these people were the only ones who seemed to truly understand my predicament. But my optimism and motivation didn’t survive my walk out the door. By the time I got to my car, I had no idea what to do. I knew that if this could be done, I would have done it, and yet I didn’t know why I couldn’t do it. Just eat less, right? It’s so simple!

About two years ago, I decided to yield to what every statistic I knew was telling me and stop trying to lose weight at all. I decided to stop dieting, but when I did, I realized I couldn’t. I didn’t know what or how to eat. I couldn’t fathom planning my food without thinking first about its ability to help or hinder a weight-loss effort. I went to a nutritional therapist to help figure this out (dieting, I have found, is its own chronic condition), and I paid her every week so I could tell her that there still had to be a way for me to lose weight. When she reminded me that I was there because I had realized on my own that there was no way to achieve this goal, I reminded this wonderful, patient person that she couldn’t possibly understand my desperation because she was skinny. I had arthritis in my knees, I said. Morality and society aside, they hurt. I have a sister with arthritis in her knees, too, but she’s skinny and her knees don’t hurt.

I went to an intuitive-eating class — intuitive eating is where you learn to feed yourself based only on internal signals and not external ones like mealtimes or diet plans. Meaning it’s just eating what you want when you’re hungry and stopping when you’re full. There were six of us in there, educated, desperate fat women, doing mindful-eating exercises and discussing their pitfalls and challenges. We were given food. We would smell the food, put the food on our lips, think about the food, taste the food, roll the food around in our mouths, swallow the food. Are you still hungry? Are you sure? The first week it was a raisin. It progressed to cheese and crackers, then to cake, then to Easter candy. We sat there silently, as if we were aliens who had just arrived on Earth and were learning what this thing called food was and why and how you would eat it. Each time we did the eating exercise, I would cry. ‘‘What is going on for you?’’ the leader would ask. But it was the same answer every time: I am 41, I would say. I am 41 and accomplished and a beloved wife and a good mother and a hard worker and a contributor to society and I am learning how to eat a goddamned raisin. How did this all go so wrong for me?

They tried to soothe me. They told me that hatred of fat was a societal construct, but I never understood why that should comfort me. I live in society. I hurt my ankle playing tennis, activating an old injury, and an internist I was seeing for the first time, without taking any medical history or vital signs — my blood pressure is pristine, just so you know — told me he couldn’t do anything for me until I lost weight and gave me a rusty photocopy about food exchanges. (Another doctor prescribed three months of physical therapy, and now my ankle is fine.) I was in Iceland, for a story assignment, and the man who owned my hotel took me fishing and said, ‘‘I’m not going to insist you wear a life jacket, since I think you’d float, if you know what I mean.’’ I ignored him, and then afterward, back on land, after I fished cod like a Viking, he said, ‘‘I call that survival of the fattest.’’ A woman getting into a seat next to me on a plane said, ‘‘Looks like this will be a cozy ride,’’ and a Manhattan taxi driver told me he liked to watch my ‘‘jelly’’ shake, by which I can only presume he meant a part of my body. I have been asked if it was my first time taking Pilates at a studio where I’m on my fifth 10-pack. I have been told at a yoga class that I have ‘‘a really great spirit’’ and it’s important that I ‘‘just keep coming.’’ (I’ve been taking yoga for 12 years.) I was told by a seamstress that she had never seen a bride not lose weight for her wedding until she met me. A crazy man tried to give me candy outside the Met, and when I politely declined he screamed at me that of course I didn’t want it, I was fat enough, and my sister asked me why I was so upset, clearly that guy was crazy, and I said, ‘‘You don’t understand because you’re skinny,’’ and on and on forever. (By the way, I am writing this despite the myriad degradations that I know will appear in my inbox and in the comments section when it is published. I am someone who once wrote a body-image essay for a women’s magazine in which a comment in the margins from an editor read, ‘‘Why doesn’t she stop eating so much?’’)

Back in Union, Dayna stood at the front of the room. The conversation had shifted to Thanksgiving foods, how sons home from college depend on the stuffin’ muffins, how husbands will know if there’s no butter in the mashed potatoes. Donna makes an Easter pie with more kinds of pork than there are pigs roaming the Earth. Really, the group members were worried that despite their weight loss, they would forget that they were really fat people on the inside. Thanksgiving is a killer.

‘‘It’s just one day,’’ Dayna said. And all those around her heaved heavy sighs.

‘‘Please hold for Ms. Winfrey.’’

When Oprah called me, she was on the same mountain in Hawaii where she sprained her ankle two years ago. After a monthslong search, Weight Watchers had hired a new C.E.O., Mindy Grossman, formerly of the Home Shopping Network. In her office, Grossman had talked to me about personalizing the company’s mobile app and creating greater moments for connection. She is tan and very blond, with pink lipstick; she looks like the second coming of Jean Nidetch. Weight Watchers had found its business leader. She was joining the company after its fourth consecutive quarter of revenue growth because it had finally found its spiritual one.

On the release day of the commercial in which Oprah told the world she loved bread and was excited to be able to eat it every day and still lose weight, the graph line shot up tall and straight at Weight Watchers. But a lot of us wondered if maybe Oprah had finally fallen out of touch. She said in one commercial, ‘‘Inside every overweight woman is a woman she knows she can be,’’ saying she’d been buried in her weight to the point where she couldn’t recognize herself, and the internet did not love this sentiment, asking exactly why Oprah thought that women were worthless if they weren’t thin. They asked if she was ‘‘disempowering women.’’ They said her investment in Weight Watchers was ‘‘bad news for women everywhere.’’ One blogger wrote that she was ‘‘disappointed that she is choosing to participate in and endorse a company whose sole purpose is to tell women that they are not enough.’’ The journalist Melissa Harris-Perry gave a five-minute ‘‘Letter of the Week’’ on MSNBC saying: ‘‘But, O! You are already precisely the woman so many are striving to be,’’ and ‘‘there is not one thing that you have done that would have been more extraordinary if you’d done it with a 25-inch waist.’’ Oprah’s $43 million investment was now worth $110 million. Maybe that’s what this was all about in the first place.

Oprah was used to criticism. Back in 1985, Joan Rivers brought Oprah on ‘‘The Tonight Show,’’ and without so much as a warning in the pre-interview, told her she shouldn’t have ‘‘let’’ her weight gain happen to her. ‘‘You’re a pretty girl, and you’re single,’’ Rivers said. Oprah explained that she had done everything so far — everything! By 1985! She had done the banana-hot-dog-egg diet (in which you just eat a banana and a hot dog and an egg). She had done the pickles-and-peanut-butter diet (in which all you eat are pickles and peanut butter).

In 1988, she pulled a wagon full of fat onto the stage of her show to show off her 67-pound weight loss. In 1991, she went on the cover of People and declared she was never dieting again. In 1996 she wrote a book with Bob Greene about having found the solution. In 2002, she wrote a story in her magazine, O, called ‘‘What I Know for Sure About Making Peace With My Body,’’ in which she announced that she had made peace with her body. In 2005, the cover of O, which usually features just one Oprah, featured two: a thin one with an exposed midriff leaning on the shoulder of another thin one in a fancy dress. In 2009, she published another two-Oprah cover. This one was the midriff-bearing one from the 2005 cover, leaning on a larger Oprah in a purple jogging suit. The cover line said, How did I let this happen again?

Oprah sounds like Oprah when you talk with her — she sings your name, ‘‘Taffy!’’ and her voice registers in you in a way that is as familiar to your body as your mother’s voice. She told me she doesn’t care if she’s never skinny again. She cares that she feels as if she has control. For her whole life, she said, her only goal has been to find a higher level of consciousness, to remain more in the moment than she has ever been in any other moment. She had never felt stress, even during all those years when she was doing three shows a day. She just ate instead. She had bags of potato chips, and people would say, ‘‘Don’t you get stressed?’’ and she’d think, What’s stress? She had seen the cultural changes for years. She knew that you were no longer supposed to say that you wanted to diet or be thinner. You had to want ‘‘fitness’’ and ‘‘strength’’ and just general health. But this thinking was a prison. So was the one where you just accept yourself and move on. “This whole P.C. about accepting yourself as you are — you should, 100 percent,” she said. But it was that thinking that made her say yes to Weight Watchers. ‘‘It’s a mechanism to keep myself on track that brings a level of consciousness and awareness to my eating. It actually is, for me, mindful eating, because the points are so ingrained now.’’ Meaning, Oprah wasn’t interested in ceding to a movement. She was wondering how to finally make this work.

‘‘In the particular moment in time that I got the call,’’ she told me, ‘‘I was desperate: What’s going to work? I’ve tried all of the green juices and protein shakes, and let’s do a cleanse, and all that stuff. That doesn’t work. It doesn’t last. What is going to be consistent, keep me conscious and mindful?’’

But this thing about acceptance? Why couldn’t accepting herself mean not accepting her weight? Why wasn’t it an act of love to use any available means to avoid her genetic predisposition to diabetes? Sure, she could have abandoned her efforts. She could have gone hard on acceptance. A million people would have bought ‘‘Oprah’s Guide to Body Acceptance.’’ But she couldn’t get there. ‘‘For your heart to pump, pump, pump, pump, it needs the least amount of weight possible to do that,’’ she said. “So all of the people who are saying, ‘Oh, I need to accept myself as I am’ — I can’t accept myself if I’m over 200 pounds, because it’s too much work on my heart. It causes high blood pressure for me. It puts me at risk for diabetes, because I have diabetes in my family.’’

I nodded into the phone because I didn’t want Oprah to hear me crying. I wanted to quit dieting, but had come to realize that dieting was all I had. I was completely perplexed by food — food! Stupid food! That’s what this was about! I dieted because I wanted to maintain hope that I could one day manage my food intake, because my bewilderment around the stuff was untenable. When I didn’t have that hope, I was left with too much worry about pain, about how much my knees hurt now and how much more they would in just a few years. I could be enlightened about my body. I could have acceptance. But nobody would tell that to the people who saw me as a target; nobody would tell that to my knees.

And yet, I told Oprah, in admitting this, I couldn’t stop feeling as if I were betraying everyone I knew who was out there trying to find peace with herself. I couldn’t stop thinking that nothing would change in the world until there was a kind of uprising.

‘‘Oh, my God, Taffy,’’ Oprah said. ‘‘I have to have a talk with you. I used to say this to my producers all the time. We are never going to win with this show looking back to see what other people are doing on their shows. The only way you win is to keep looking forward for yourself. What’s best for you?’’

The ‘‘you’’ threw me. I didn’t know if she meant ‘‘you’’ as in my body or ‘‘you’’ as in me, and it occurred to me that she could mean both, that some people think of those two things as the same thing. I treated my body with such contempt, but my body wasn’t different from me. There were no two of me to put on a magazine cover, just the one of me.

Weight isn’t neutral. A woman’s body isn’t neutral. A woman’s body is everyone’s business but her own. Even in our attempts to free one another, we were still trying to tell one another what to want and what to do. It is terrible to tell people to try to be thinner; it is also terrible to tell them that wanting to lose weight is hopeless and wrong.

I don’t know if diets can work in the short term or the long term. For the first time, I began to think that this was something worth being made crazy over. Our bodies deserve our thoughts and our kindness, our acceptance and our striving. Our bodies are what carry our thoughts and our kindness and our acceptance and striving.

On Saturday, March 18, Donna, of the meeting in Union, made her goal weight. Six weeks later, having maintained the weight, she became a lifetime member. If she stayed within a few pounds of her goal, she could keep using the program free. There were other lifetime members in our meeting. There were also former lifetime members who were starting over.

Eileen, a lifetime member who sat next to Donna at every meeting, had bought her a plastic tiara. Donna wore leggings this time, not sweatpants as usual, with her traditional Uggs and a fleece, and someone pointed out that you could finally see her shape. She passed around some old pictures; she was unrecognizable in them, if you could find her behind all the other people in the picture.

‘‘I don’t think I’ll ever feel like a thin person,’’ Donna said. Her hope is that she’ll continue to at least look like one.


Dayna, near sobbing, gave her a bunch of star stickers off her roll. ‘‘My heart just feels so happy today,’’ she said.

We all cheered for Donna, and when I left, I walked around outside. A skinny woman was eating a cupcake and talking on her phone, tonguing the icing as if she were on ecstasy. Another skinny woman drank a regular Dr Pepper as if it were nothing, as if it were just a drink. I continued walking and stopped in front of a diner and watched through the window people eating cheeseburgers and French fries and talking gigantically. All these people, I looked at them as if they were speaking Mandarin or discussing string theory, with their ease around their food and their ease around their bodies and their ability to live their lives without the doubt and self-loathing that brings me to my arthritic knees still. There’s no such thing as magic, Taffy. I shook my head at the impossibility of it all, and sitting here writing this, I still do.

Taffy Brodesser-Akner is a contributing writer for the magazine. In September, she will become a features writer for The Times’s culture desk and a staff writer for the magazine.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

A version of this article appears in print on August 6, 2017, on Page MM35 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Losing It. Today's Paper|Subscribe

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE
Overweight Asian-Americans Are Seen as More ‘American,’ Study Finds AUG. 3, 2017

Opinion Opinion
Why You Can’t Lose Weight on a Diet MAY 6, 2016

FIRST PERSON
Why I Worship the Weight Watchers Founder Jean Nidetch MAY 6, 2017

SHOW ALL
What's Next
Loading...
Go to Home Page »
SITE INDEX THE NEW YORK TIMES

Site Index Navigation
NEWS

World
U.S.
Politics
N.Y.
Business
Tech
Science
Health
Sports
Education
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION

Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Contributing Writers
Op-Ed Contributors
Opinionator
Letters
Sunday Review
Taking Note
Room for Debate
Video: Opinion
ARTS

Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING

Automobiles
Crossword
Food
Education
Fashion & Style
Health
Jobs
Magazine
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Real Estate
T Magazine
Travel
Weddings & Celebrations
LISTINGS & MORE

Reader Center
Classifieds
Tools & Services
Times Topics
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Blogs
Multimedia
Photography
Video
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Subscribe
Manage My Account
NYTCo
SUBSCRIBE

 Home Delivery
 Digital Subscriptions
 Crossword
Email Newsletters
Alerts
Gift Subscriptions
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Site Information Navigation
© 2017 The New York Times Company HomeSearchAccessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.Contact UsWork With UsAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite Information Navigation
Site MapHelpSite FeedbackSubscriptions
SUBSCRIBE
First Golfer: Donald Trump's relationship with golf has never been more complicated

Trump was first off the tee at Aberdeen in 2012, but the Scottish Environmental Protection Agency has foiled his bid to open a second course there.
ANDY BUCHANAN/AFP/GETTYIMAGES

Alan Shipnuck
Tuesday August 1st, 2017



[This article appears in the Aug. 7, 2017, edition of Sports Illustrated.]

With special reporting by Michael Bamberger, Ben Baskin and Pete Madden.

Playing golf with the 45th President of the United States offers a revealing character study of him. Donald Trump's private clubs are where he feels most comfortable, and holding court with members and guests and employees is an important part of the ritual—in the pro shop, at the driving range and especially on the 1st tee, where Trump traditionally announces the teams for a friendly wager and will typically take the best player available for his partner. Some earnest person in the group will typically keep score, though the terms of the match are usually unstated and Trump's interest in the ebb and flow of the match is modest at best. Yet he somehow knows when his putt is meaningful, and he attempts those putts with a certain amount of fanfare.


SI spoke with numerous people who have teed it up with Trump over the years and all report that he doesn't play a round of golf so much as narrate it, his commentary peppered with hyperbole. "Is this not the most beautiful asphalt you've ever seen in your life?" he'll say of an ordinary cart path. At the turn he'll ask, "Have you ever had a better burger?" Years ago Trump was mid-round when he took a long call from Mark Burnett, the producer of The Apprentice. He put down his phone just long enough to play his shots, at one point saying, "Wait one second here while I blast this 250-yard 3-wood." Trump also lavishes attention on his playing partners. "We didn't talk any business because there wasn't time," says Ernie Els, who last February played golf alongside Trump and Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe. "He was more focused on making sure me and the Japanese prime minister had a good time. He kept on the two of us, making sure we had a proper introduction, making conversation, just being a good host."

Trump always takes a cart and a caddie, whom he pays well. He insists on driving. Recent footage that showed him navigating his cart across a green at his club in Bedminster, N.J., generated horror in the golf press, but this is old news at Trump's clubs, where he has been known to drive onto tee boxes too.


Trump was first off the tee at Aberdeen in 2012, but the Scottish Environmental Protection Agency has foiled his bid to open a second course there.
ANDY BUCHANAN/AFP/GETTYIMAGES
As for his game, Trump is surprisingly limber for a portly man of 6' 2", and his good eye-hand coordination shows through in all aspects of his play, but especially in his ability to hole putts, which he does with a wristy, old-fashioned stroke that is nothing like the method preferred by the best players today. On the backswing of his full shots, he takes the club inside and, impressively, gets his left shoulder well behind the ball. He then makes a lunging, down-the-line swing with his feet dancing through the finish. It's not pretty, but it repeats and it's a swing with rhythm and power. "He's a much better golfer than you think he'd be because he hits the ball a long way," says Phil Mickelson. "He has clubhead speed, and there's no substitute for that." Trump favors the latest in TaylorMade equipment, owing to a long-standing friendship with Mark King, the company's former CEO. But when Prime Minister Abe gave Trump a gold-colored Honma Beres S-05 driver, it went straight into the bag. (Retail price of the club: $3,755. The gift was made in November, and as President-elect, Trump was permitted to accept a gift that he would not have been allowed to take after the inauguration; Presidents are forbidden from accepting a present from a foreign government with a value that exceeds $390.)

Trump will sometimes respond to a shot he duffed by simply playing a second ball and carrying on as if the first shot never happened. In the parlance of the game, Trump takes floating mulligans, usually more than one during a round. Because of them it is impossible to say what he has actually shot on any given day, according to 18 people who have teed it up with Trump over the last decade, including SI senior writer Michael Bamberger, who has done so nine times. In 2007, Trump called Bamberger to brag about a 68 he had shot at Bel-Air Country Club in Los Angeles. Trump's handicap index is officially 2.8, but he has posted only three scores since '14. Els, a South Florida resident who has known Trump for many years, estimates he is "an eight or a nine." For Trump to shoot 68 on a tough course like Bel-Air would require him to play nearly perfectly from tee to green while making a number of substantial putts. One of his playing partners that day confirmed that Trump played "good," but that he took all the usual liberties common among everyday golfers: mulligans, gimmes, improved lies, etc. There was no mention of the 68 in a subsequent story, and Bamberger heard about it from Trump.

In a 2013 tweet aimed at entrepreneur Mark Cuban, Trump wrote, "Golf match? I've won 18 Club Championships including this weekend. @mcuban swings like a little girl with no power or talent. Mark's a loser." Trump has never made public a list of his club titles, and fact-checking calls to all of the Trump properties on this subject went universally un-returned. Winged Foot is the one non-Trump club at which the President is a member, and his name does not appear on any of the honor boards in the old clubhouse.

Trump has often said that golf is a small part of his businesses but that it means more to him than any of the others. As he told SI years ago, "A lot of my friends are gardeners. I never understood it. Then I started building golf courses—it's gardening on a big scale." He clearly loves the game, and even at 71 is easily the best golfer who has ever lived in the White House. It is a long-standing trope that golf reveals a lot about a man's character. What, then, does President Trump's life in golf say about him?

* * * * *

Donald Trump has always been attuned to the status markers of the ruling class. Private golf clubs were and remain a particular obsession of his. He could buy the gaudiest house in Palm Beach—and he did, Mar-A-Lago—but he would never be invited to join the nearby Seminole Golf Club, where Ben Hogan wintered every year to prepare for the Masters. (According to club lore, Trump's chances of admission vanished when he dined there with his then wife Marla Maples and she breast-fed their infant daughter, Tiffany, in view of the ladies who were lunching.) Trump may have reshaped skylines up and down the East Coast, but citadels such as Pine Valley and Shinnecock Hills remain beyond his grasp, their memberships prizing discretion and old money. If building skyscrapers is pure id, creating golf courses is a chance to play God by literally reshaping the Earth, and so Trump has created a series of monuments to himself, replete with man-made waterfalls. The perennial outsider now has nine eponymous private enclaves of his own, to go along with seven high-end public properties, on three continents.

With his children (from left) Eric, Donald Jr. and Ivanka beside him, Trump reopened Turnberry in June 2016, one of 16 clubs around the world that bears his name.
ANDREW MILLIGAN/PA WIRE
But building golf courses was never going to be enough. Trump pined for the validation that would come with important championships being conducted on his courses. These can only be bestowed by the tweedy ruling bodies, and so Trump campaigned for such tournaments with the same intensity he would later bring to chasing electoral votes. To woo the decision-makers, Trump lavished free memberships upon at least three golf officials as well as relentless attention that continues today; since being elected he has played golf with and had multiple phone conversations with Pete Bevacqua, the CEO of the PGA of America. There has been much to discuss: In May, Trump National Golf Club Washington, D.C., hosted the PGA Senior Championship, and in 2022 the PGA Championship will be played at Trump Bedminister, the so-called Summer White House in a tony hamlet in New Jersey, 45 miles from New York City and six miles from USGA headquarters. (The President is playing the long game with the PGA of America, hoping to land one of the sport's ultimate prizes, the Ryder Cup.) Last month Trump got a national championship when the USGA brought the U.S. Women's Open to Bedminister. Trump spent 2 1/2 days chewing the scenery at the tournament, his obvious good cheer undiminished by a smattering of protesters on nearby roadways and others standing peacefully beneath his aerie looming over the 16th tee. Trump tweeted eight times about the event, more than he has since taking office about opioid addiction, the international refugee crisis and climate change ... combined.

Golf is never far from the President's mind, it seems. In perhaps the most cogent analysis of how he took the electoral college while losing the popular vote, he told The New York Times, "It's like, if you're a golfer, it's like match play versus stroke play." To illustrate his contention of widespread voting fraud, according to a story in the Times, Trump cited to a gathering of lawmakers that two-time Masters champ Bernhard Langer had been unable to vote at a polling place in Florida while several people "who did not look as if they should be allowed to vote" were permitted to cast provisional ballots. One complication with this spurious anecdote: Langer, a German national, is not a U.S. citizen and is not eligible to vote here. In feting Clemson's national football championship, Trump likened the team's iron will to Jack Nicklaus's and Arnold Palmer's. In a meeting with business leaders at the White House, Trump coaxed Jeff Immelt, the CEO of General Electric, into telling the story of having witnessed the President make a hole in one years earlier. While TV cameras rolled, Immelt said, "President Trump goes up to a par-3 on his course. He looks at the three of us and says, ‘You realize, of course, I'm the richest golfer in the world.' Then [he] gets a hole in one. So I have to say, I've seen the magic before."

Here Trump interjected, "It's a crazy—no, I actually I said I was the best golfer of all the rich people, to be exact, and then I got a hole in one. So it was sort of cool."

MORE: Trump's 10 best golf courses, ranked!  |  Trump's swing sequence

Ascending to the Presidency never seems to diminish any commander in chief's ardor for the game—Ike, Nixon, Clinton etc. On the campaign trail Trump mocked Barack Obama for playing golf too often, but since taking office Trump has spent some part of more than 20% of his days at a golf club. (Exactly how many rounds he's played is subject to conjecture because the White House refuses to confirm when the President tees it up, even on days when he's spotted with clubs in tow.) Trump has theoretically turned over day-to-day operations of his golf business to his son Eric—who was recently in Scotland to open the new King Robert the Bruce course, where he declared, regrettably, "We made Turnberry great again"—but there have been concerns about conflicts of interest. Four days after the election, the President-elect hectored British officials about a long-standing obsession: a wind farm off the coast of Aberdeen, Scotland, that he says spoils the views from Trump International Golf Links. In February, while Trump's so-called Muslim ban was front-page news, Eric and his brother Donald Jr. flew to the United Arab Emirates under Secret Service protection for the gala opening of Trump International Golf Club Dubai, a swank new course at the heart of a vast development where thousands of luxury homes offer the chance for Saudis and Iranians and other wealthy buyers to park their money. Another branded course, Trump World Golf Club Dubai, is being built down the road as part of AKOYA Oxygen, a 55-million-square-foot development; the course has been designed by Tiger Woods, who teed it up with the President-elect a month after the election.

Trump has two large-scale golf projects in development in Indonesia, the largest Muslim country in the world. The Trump Lido course, outside Jakarta, is being designed by Els. On Bali, Mickelson is re-designing a course for what is being billed as a six-star resort. Trump's partner in both developments is Hary Tanoesoedibjo, a billionaire who was a vice presidential candidate in Indonesia on a failed ticket in 2014. Tanoesoedibjo was an invited guest at Trump's inauguration and later said his friend had inspired him to strongly consider running for Indonesia's presidency. An April '17 story by The Intercept detailed Tanoesoedibjo's alleged links to an ISIS-backed militia that is seeking to oust Indonesia's democratically elected president, Joko Widodo. Were Tanoesoedibjo to take the presidency in 2019, it would be un-precedented for a U.S. President to have such deep financial ties to another head of state.

Trump's golf business has also created various complications domestically. Going back to 1998, Trump Organization properties have been involved in at least 98 lawsuits. Trump has sued more than half a dozen municipalities, seeking to have the property taxes on his courses lowered. (One exception is the Bedminster course, at which a small herd of penned goats allows Trump to take a tax credit for "agricultural use.")

During one of the debates, Hillary Clinton cited painters who had been "stiffed" by Trump—in a much-publicized 2016 judgment, a Miami paint store was awarded $32,535.87 in owed billings for work done at Trump Doral. (Nearly $300,000 in penalties and lawyers' fees were also imposed.) A different golf-related lawsuit led to Trump's running afoul of IRS regulations. At a '10 outing to benefit Alonzo Mourning Charities at Trump National Westchester, a $1 million prize was offered for a hole in one on the 13th hole. A finance titan named Martin Greenberg dunked his shot, but the insurance company underwriting the contest refused to pay, saying the contract stipulated that the hole had to play at least 150 yards but was set up at only 139—not that Greenberg or any of the other golfers knew that the hole had been laid out too short. He sued, and eventually the case was settled with Trump's agreeing to make a $158,000 donation to Greenberg's foundation. The money came from Trump's foundation, instead of out of his own pocket. (This so-called "self-dealing" is illegal. Trump was ordered to pay a fine for a separate such violation, and he shuttered his charity.)

* * * * *

There is no doubting Trump's deep affection for the game of his Scottish mother's ancestors. (He has said that building Trump Scotland in woolly dunes on the eastern coast was a tribute to her—Mary MacLeod.) His first foray into golf, a half century ago, was not as a country-club kid but at a lively public course, Cobbs Creek, in West Philadelphia. He was introduced to the game by classmates while he was an undergraduate at Wharton from 1966 to '68. Trump said to GOLF.com, "My initial reaction to the game was that I loved the competition. But as you get older and wiser and richer, you realize it's not only about the competition, it's about the beauty of it, and that's what has kept me attracted me to the game more than anything: walking down all those beautiful fairways." He venerates the old-time greats. The clubhouses at his courses are full of pictures of Hogan, the most precise and least bombastic of all the great golfers. But Trump felt a particular kinship for Palmer, and before the King's passing last year, he often remarked, "What a man he is." When Trump named a villa at Doral for Palmer, Arnie was there to cut the ribbon. Ditto for Woods and for Gary Player. When Mickelson called Trump to praise the practice range at one of his courses, Trump saved the message for months.

As he did during a round in West Palm Beach in April, Trump always takes a caddie and a cart with him, but he insists on being behind the wheel.
ALLEN EYESTONE/THE PALM BEACH POST
Trump has supporters in the LPGA because he has treated the players with a similar deference. From 2001 through '08 the tour held its season-ending event at the Trump course in West Palm Beach. (In '06 it became the first LPGA tournament to offer a million dollars to the winner.) Trump rolled out the red carpet for golfers who were accustomed to being treated with little fanfare. Throughout the tournament he relentlessly schmoozed the players, spreading goodwill and befriending two of the most prominent women on tour, Natalie Gulbis and Cristie Kerr. (Trump has offered advice on business matters to both and, in the case of Gulbis, counsel on her love life; after her romance with Ben Roethlisberger ended and she said publicly that he was the one who broke things off, Trump told Gulbis, "I never want to read that again. From now on I want to read that you dumped him.") On election night, when many athletes took to social media to express their misgivings about the result, LPGA pros were notable in their enthusiasm for the Trump victory. Suzann Pettersen's tweet was representative: "Hats off for this man, @realDonaldTrump, Mr. president :) congrats my friend! #thetrumpshowwillcontinue."

And so while the U.S. Women's Open generated protests in the streets last month (sign on an overpass of I-78: women's rights are human rights) and hand-wringing in the press, the players were largely supportive of Trump. Those with misgivings about playing their most important tournament on a Trump course were too politic to say so publicly, preferring to grumble to reporters off the record. The USGA had awarded the Women's Open to Bedminster in May 2012; sources within the organization confirm that last year, after Trump ratcheted up his controversial campaign rhetoric, the organization had looked into changing the venue but decided the cost would have been too high, financially and politically, especially after Trump threatened a lawsuit. For Trump, hosting the Women's Open was a triumph, the culmination of more than a decade of intensive wooing. The Women's Open is rarely a money-maker for the host venue but he gladly signed on, knowing it is often a stepping-stone to what he covets most, hosting a U.S. Open at his crown jewel Trump Bedminster. "I might be an old man being wheeled around or even dead," Trump told SI in '11, "but it'll happen."

* * * * *

The red 1986 Ford F-150 Flareside rumbles down Lamington Road in the town of Bedminster, past the intricate stone wall and the two black signs emblazoned with gold lettering—trump national golf club and private—that mark the entrance to the club where the President's daughter Ivanka was married in 2009 and where he wishes to someday be buried. Two American flags stick out of the hood of the pickup, and a pocket-sized blue Constitution sits on the driver's seat. An effigy of Trump rides in the truckbed, the dummy adorned with a foot-long Pinocchio nose, a Russian flag in its right hand, and a cardboard tombstone around its neck that reads rip 23 million people. As the horn of the truck ceased functioning years ago, the driver and organizer of the rally, Jim Girvan, resorts to leaning out the window and blowing a vuvuzela as he passes the golf club.

It's a bleak, rainy Saturday in the middle of June, and there are eight cars in the cortege, carrying 12 adults and one six-month-old baby. "Rain or shine, few or many, we persist to resist," Girvan, 64, says, taking a puff of his e-cigarette. The so-called People's Motorcade has met every Saturday since the first weekend of March, gathering at 9 a.m. at Ten Eyck Park, about six miles from Trump Bedminster, where the group adorns their cars with signs. (Today's includes DUMP TRUMP, replete with a poop emoji sporting a blond coif.) The protestors then drive up and down Lamington Road, honking horns and waving signs. The weekend before, 150 cars, carrying 500 people, came out to the rally because Trump was at the club hosting a fundraiser for Tom MacArthur, a congressman instrumental in passing the House health-care bill.

All of this hubbub is in jarring contrast to the atmosphere in an idyllic town that is seemingly frozen in time. There are 8,200 residents of Bedminster, including Woody Johnson, the owner of the New York Jets and Trump's choice for ambassador to the U.K., as well as former presidential candidate and publishing mogul Steve Forbes. Most of the residents live on expansive properties carved out of the former farmland. The town seal has a horse's head emblazoned in the center, and there are still 18 miles of dirt roads in Bedminster, preserved over the decades to allow residents to meander on horseback. One eccentric is known for tooling around town in a carriage drawn by eight horses.

Supporters showed up at the Women's Open in Bedminster last month. Trump flew from Paris and arrived at the club on Friday and stayed through the weekend.
CAROLYN KASTER/AP
Trump bought Bedminster in 2002 for $35 million when developers of a 506-acre project ran into financial difficulties. He is an astute shopper always on the lookout for distressed properties that can be had for a good price. The previous owners were already more than halfway done with a golf course, but, working with celebrated course architect Tom Fazio, Trump oversaw extensive changes to the layout, including the addition of a massive waterfall framing the 1st hole that he has bragged cost upward of $10 million. Trump Bedminster debuted in '04 and has been a staple on GOLF magazine's Top 100 list. In '08 a second 18 holes opened, designed by Tommy Fazio, a nephew of the architect. (Trump had wanted him listed in promotional materials as Tom Fazio II, even though his father's name is Jim.) This track was named the New Course while the original layout, which hosted the Women's Open, was retro-actively christened the Old Course. Initiation fees have run as high as $250,000, and the annual dues are currently $22,100. ("And they nickel and dime us to death on everything!!!" one member says via text message, including this year an additional charge of $26 to register members' handicap indexes.)

Though Trump doesn't like to publicly identify a favorite among his courses, Bedminster is special to him because of the acclaim it has received and its proximity to his home base of New York City. It's so special, in fact, that in 2014 Trump filed a petition with the state of New Jersey to build a 10-plot private family cemetery on a piece of land overlooking the 1st hole.

During election season, Bedminster morphed into a kind of permanent campaign rally site. Trump posters and bumper stickers were plastered across the property, and an anti-Hillary shrine was built in a bar in the men's locker room. The club held a Ryder Cup–style competition in which the teams wore either red or black Make America Great Again hats. At most other golf courses in America the TV is tuned to Golf Channel, on mute, but throughout last summer and fall, the television in Trump Bedminster's shop was on Fox News, with the sound blaring. As President, Trump has already made four visits to the club. He has his own cottage adjacent to the pool; it was recently given a secure perimeter by the Secret Service, leading to the inevitable joke that it's the only wall Trump has successfully built. Chatting with some members before a recent round of golf, he explained his frequent appearances: "That White House is a real dump." (A White House spokesperson denies this occurred.) Trump is often at his most unguarded among the people who pay for their proximity to him. Last November, the President-elect hosted a cocktail reception and dinner at Bedminster on the same weekend that he was holding interviews at the club with candidates for his Cabinet. At the dinner, Trump addressed the members of the club by saying, "This is my real group. You are the special people. I see all of you. I recognize, like, 100% of you, just about." Then he issued an open invitation to drop in on his Cabinet interviews the next day.

The White House does not disclose the President's playing partners, but word often leaks out; after a round together in February, Rory McIlroy took so much heat publicly for what was construed by some as a political act that he later said he doubts he would accept another invitation from Trump. In early July, Bedminster member Mike Ferguson was rumored to have played with Trump. This caught the attention of Washington Post reporter David Fahrentold because Ferguson is a lobbyist for Big Pharma. (Ferguson's employer, BakerHostetler, did not respond to a request for comment.)

It's plain to see why a lobbyist would revel in rubbing elbows with the President, but at Bedminster there has been a backlash to the fanfare that now accompanies Trump's visits. One member says two dozen of his brethren have already resigned or put their memberships on hold for a year and that he expects a similar number to vote with their wallets next year. This is less of a political protest than a nod to the attendant hassles: When Trump is on the grounds all cars are searched upon entry; if he is in the clubhouse, all members must clear security before entering, even if it's a quick jaunt to the gents at the turn; and if Trump is in his cottage, kids in bathing suits are wanded before being allowed in the pool area.

Divisions within the town of Bedminster were reflected in the election—Trump won by just 42 votes. (Mitt Romney took Bedminster by nearly 600 in 2012.) Trump has a mixed reputation as a steward in the community. He set aside 210 acres for a grassland habitat for birds, and it was planted with a grass seed mix called Donald Trump Golden Fescue. But in '11 the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection cited the golf club for a number of violations, including waste-water pollution, destruction of wetlands and the illegal removal of a stand of mature trees.

Before Trump's foray into politics, the biggest controversy around Trump Bedminster was the "farmland" tax break because of the eight resident goats—which the club claims cut the grass—and 113 acres of hay surrounding the course. The designation saves Trump Bedminster tens of thousands of dollars a year in taxes, although the club is still Bedminster's second highest taxpayer, behind AT&T, which has a complex in town. The blurred lines between his roles as President and club patriarch created headlines earlier this year when a brochure for Trump Bedminster's bridal planning service stated that: "If [Trump] is on-site for your big day, he will likely stop in & congratulate the happy couple. He may take some photos with you but we ask you and your guests to be respectful of his time & privacy." The brochure was changed after an outcry that the President was using his office for monetary gain, but a few weeks later Trump still popped into a wedding, and photos of him with the bride and groom lit up social media.

Trump's preoccupation with golf has been duly noted by protesters too.
JEFF MALET/NEWSCOM/ZUMA PRESS.COM
Trump Bedminster is an important gathering spot for charities and community events because the town has no hotel or other banquet hall to host meetings. "They've never turned us down," mayor Steven Parker says of an annual swearing-in party for public officials held at the club. "They give us the charity rate. So politics aside, I think the average person in Bedminster would have a very positive view of the Trump Organization and probably Mr. Trump. The people that I've mostly dealt with have looked at it like, ‘The sitting President likes our town as much as we do. So I may not agree with everything that he stands for. Or I may not agree with anything that he stands for. But, by God, it's kinda neat to have a President living in your town.'"

* * * * *

Trump's smooth relations with Bedminister owe much to Ed Russo, the self-styled (he has no formal training or degree) environmental expert for the Trump Organization who is an all-purpose fixer and consigliere. Russo grew up in Bedminster and later chaired the town planning board; he helped broker Trump's purchase of the land. Outside Bedminister, the combative style Trump has employed in the White House characterizes his dealings in golf. During a 2005 lawsuit with a construction company over disputed billings for work done at Trump's golf club in Westchester County, N.Y., his then lawyer Y. David Scharf offered this: "If you get caught with your hand in Mr. Trump's cookie jar, you're going to get slapped and slapped hard." Trump was ultimately awarded $2.1 million in damages, plus interest and legal fees. (He later sued Scharf's firm, Morrison Cohen LLP, for unauthorized use of his name and likeness on its website; the lawyers termed the suit "frivolous" and claimed it was a diversionary tactic as Trump was unwilling to pay an outstanding tab of $470,000. While a judge threw out Trump's complaint, the parties came to an undisclosed settlement.) In other legal skirmishes, the cookies have often gone to Trump's opponents.

In February 2017 a federal judge ordered Trump Jupiter Ritz Carlton, in South Florida, to pay $5.77 million to a group of 65 disgruntled members. Trump had purchased the Jack Nicklaus–designed course in '12. In a letter to the members, he vowed to turn it into "one of the finest clubs anywhere in the world!" By the time Trump assumed control, 150 members were on a waiting list to resign from the club and claim their refundable deposits of $200,000. (This potential $30 million liability had been part of the terms of the sale.) As at many high-end clubs, a member's resignation at Jupiter isn't accepted until a new member joins. It could take years to clear the resignation list and in the interim the members were still being billed their monthly dues. But Trump barred them from the grounds, saying in an April deposition, "You're probably not going to be a very good club member, you're not going to be so happy." He then offered the wait-listers a deal: They could remain part of the club if they forfeited their deposit and in return they would receive three years of free dues (a total savings of at most $20,000, depending on the membership category). In the letter to members, he wrote: "If you choose to remain on the resignation list—you're out." In subsequent video testimony, Trump termed the threat "negotiation." The members wanted their money back, lawyered up and ultimately prevailed.

Not all of Trump's golf-related legal skirmishes are battles between haves and have-mores. In February 2016, the Trump Organization sued five homeowners whose properties are adjacent to the Red Course at Trump Doral, in Miami. Russo told The Miami Herald that the middle-class homes were "in serious disrepair. And there are behaviors in people's backyards that are inconsistent with a world-class set of golf courses like Donald Trump is attempting to create." Russo told The Herald that the behavior included the playing of music, consumption of alcoholic beverages and the hanging of undergarments on a clothesline. Trump Doral's solution was to plant flowers, bushes and 20-foot palm trees, blocking the neighbors' long-standing views of the golf course (and the golfers' view of the neighbors). When resort personnel discovered that the plantings had been trimmed back and some of the palms denuded, the lawsuits were filed, with each homeowner being hit with $15,000 in damages. "We're not the bully," Russo told The Herald. "We're not going on their property and doing anything. We don't want to sue them. We just want them to stop." The lawsuit remains unresolved.

A USA Today report in June 2016 identified more than 3,500 lawsuits over the last three decades to which the Trump Organization has been a party. In some corners of New York and South Florida, where Trump has spent most of his life, getting sued by him is routine: In July 2010 he slapped Palm Beach County Airport with a suit, claiming airplanes were being directed over Mar-A-Lago out of spite. "Ah well, he's sued me before," said Bruce Pelley, the airport director. Indeed, that was in 1995, with a similar lawsuit about noise over Mar-A-Lago. Trump dropped the suit after the county agreed to lease 215 acres to him. The county had previously balked at Trump's attempts to acquire the land, which became Trump International Golf Club West Palm Beach. His lawsuits often seem like bargaining ploys. "In examining the body of reporting on his golf properties, a theme quickly emerges," The Huffington Post reported. "With Trump, every spat—no matter how petty—turned into a war."

The bucolic town of Palos Verdes, just south of Los Angeles, became one battleground. Trump bought the former Ocean Trails golf course out of bankruptcy in 2002, after three holes were damaged by a landslide. His purchases of distressed properties, whether at Doral or Ireland's Doonbeg or a 36-hole complex in Washington, D.C., have followed a pattern: Trump is hailed as a conquering hero who will add value to the community; he invests a substantial amount of money to improve the properties, and for a while everyone is happy; legal skirmishes ensue, with Trump using his seemingly limitless resources (and the press) to try to overwhelm the other side. At the rechristened Trump National Los Angeles, the eponymous owner wanted to develop 20 luxury homes, but Palos Verdes was insisting on rigorous environmental and safety studies because of the previous landslide. Trump sued the city for $100 million in '08. Other grievances he had with Palos Verdes included the city's refusal to rename Ocean Trails Drive to Trump National Drive and the removal of a row of 12-foot ficus trees that had been planted without a permit to block the view of a low-cost housing development at the edge of the property.

Trump has teed it up with Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe, among many other famous, and powerful, figures.
JIJI PRESS/AFP/GETTY IMAGES
In 2008 this same golf course birthed another lawsuit. Trump was sued for age discrimination by Lucy Messerschmidt, a hostess at the clubhouse restaurant. She alleged that under Trump's direction she had been dismissed in favor of younger, more fetching women, a charge that was backed up by sworn testimony from both the course's restaurant manager and the director of catering. Messerschmidt's lawsuit evolved into a class-action suit that ultimately involved 913 current and former employees of the club and came to include other labor violations including the denial of bathroom breaks and paid lunches. In '13, Trump paid $475,000 in a settlement. As for his concurrent battle with the city, in '11 a judge upheld Palos Verdes's environmental review process, but other parts of the lawsuit ground on. In '13 a new mayor and some fresh faces on the city council helped broker a peace, renaming the road to the course and offering an extension on the development agreement that governs the property. Trump withdrew the suit.

When it comes to reducing the property taxes on his golf courses, he has battled to the bitter end. In July 2015, Trump filed financial disclosures as part of his presidential bid in which he declared seven of his domestic golf courses to be worth at least $50 million each. But when it has been time to pay the tax man, Trump has sued more than a half-dozen -municipalities fighting for valuations that are a fraction of what he recently stated the courses to be worth. The crux of these lawsuits is a common municipal tax loophole based on "current use," in which appraisals are based on how much income a property is generating as is, not its intrinsic value. Trump bought Trump National Golf Club Westchester out of foreclosure in the mid-1990s for $8 million. He claims to have spent $45 million on improvements, including an opulent 75,000-square-foot clubhouse. (The downstroke to join the private club is $250,000.) Trump has also been approved to build 71 condominium units along the 9th fairway, in what is a highly regarded school district in Briarcliff Manor, a suburb north of New York City, and part of the town of Ossining. Westchester was one of the properties that Trump valued at more than $50 million in his disclosures.

In 2008, during the economic downturn, Ossining slashed the taxable valuation of the club by 55%, to $13.5 million. (The Westchester Journal News reported that "Trump's legal team had pleaded for relief.") Yet in May '16, Trump sued the city to have the value of the club reduced to $1.4 million. If successful, his tax bill would plummet by a corresponding 90%. Trump's biggest savings would be in how much he pays in school taxes, with the local district receiving $32,000 instead of $287,000. In 2015, Trump told FORTUNE, "I feel golf should be an aspirational game. People should come to golf, golf shouldn't come to them. [That attitude] may be elitist, and perhaps that's what golf needs. Let golf be elitist. When I say ‘aspire,' that's a positive word. Let people work hard and aspire to someday be able to play golf. To afford to play it." His persistent litigation with the communities surrounding his luxurious properties has only widened the gulf between those who are in the club and those who are not. Ossining's receiver of taxes, Gloria Fried, spoke to this in summing up her town's ongoing dispute with the President: "He's going to pass the tax burden on to everybody else. And we still won't get to play on his golf course."

Trump's overseas golf interests have added a layer of complication to Middle East politics. His closest business ties are with Saudia Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, two countries excluded from the administration's travel ban. His newest courses to open will be in the UAE, and his business partner there is Hussain Sajwani. A Shiite Muslim in a Sunni country, Sajwani has been a controversial figure in the UAE; he owns a large catering business that fed U.S. soldiers during both gulf wars as well as during conflicts in Bosnia, Somalia and Afghanistan. He transitioned into a real estate mogul through his company Damac Properties, which is building some 10,000 luxury housing units around both of the Trump golf courses in Dubai, which are among the largest developments in the country. Sajwani attended the President-elect's New Year's Eve party at Mar-a-Lago, and headlines were made when Trump hailed him from the stage.

Trump has played with 14-time major-winner Tiger Woods, whom he greeted after a tournament at Doral in 2013.
WARREN LITTLE/GETTY IMAGES
During the presidential campaign, as the Republican nominee was ratcheting up his incendiary rhetoric about Muslims, the five large gold letters spelling his name were removed from the entrance to Trump International Golf Club Dubai. It was a powerful symbolic gesture. But the glittering lettering has now been restored, and business is brisk; before it even officially opened in February, the club had already sold more than 60 memberships, each costing six figures. (According to the financial disclosures filed during the campaign, Trump to that point had already been paid between $2 million and $10 million by Damac.)

During a visit to Trump Dubai's shiny real estate sales center in February, a steady stream of Mercedes and Bentleys pulled up, carrying men and women in traditional attire. One employee agreed to speak on the agreement that neither his nor her name nor any identifying details would be used. "All day long there is talk about Trump and what his intentions are," the person said. "There is fear, for sure. We all wonder what his next order will be. But Dubai is a place obsessed with wealth and status. The Trump name has always been about wealth. Now he is President of the United States—nothing has greater status than that. Whatever their personal feelings may be about him, the buyers here don't want to miss out on the opportunity to align themselves with the Trump brand."

The biggest name in golf is now linked to the President through the Trump World Golf Club Dubai, which is slated to open in 2018. "My father and Tiger have been friends for a long time," Eric Trump told GOLF.com in a '16 interview. "They've been very, very close. When you combine Trump and Tiger, it's a match made in heaven." But in a statement to GOLF.com, Woods's spokesman Glenn Greenspan wrote: "Tiger is not in partnership with Mr. Trump or his organization and stating otherwise is absolutely wrong. Tiger Woods Design's contract and obligation is to the developer, Damac Properties. Our association ends there. I can't put it any clearer than Tiger Woods Design does not have an agreement with Mr. Trump."

Who is and isn't doing business with Trump has become a hot-button issue throughout the Middle East. Last month Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Arab allies broke off diplomatic relations and began a blockade on trade and travel with Qatar, claiming it was punishment for the country's support of terrorism. Trump was immediately critical of Qatar, and in analyzing his aggressive stance siding with Saudi Arabia and the UAE, home countries of 17 of the 19 Sept. 11 terrorists, media in the Middle East and elsewhere noted that the President has no business ties to Qatar. He had traveled to Qatar in 2010 trying to raise capital for a real estate fund but was rebuffed by Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim al-Thani, who was then serving as Qatar's foreign minister and prime minister. Brian Egan, a state department legal adviser during the Obama Administration, recently told The New York Times, "Other countries in the Middle East see what is happening and may think, We should be opening golf courses. Even if there is no nefarious intent on behalf of the President or the Trumps, for a president to be making money from business holdings in sensitive places around the world is likely to have an impact."

How else, will golf influence the 45th President of the United States? Trump Lido in Indonesia is scheduled to open next year, giving him a stake in a politically unstable country of 258 million. A Wall Street banker and member of a Trump club with knowledge of the financing of the $63 million Turnberry purchase expects the deal to be a subject of interest to special prosecutor Robert Mueller, given the foreign lenders he says were involved. In July 2016, Bloomberg BusinessWeek reported that top executives in the Trump Organization made many visits to Cuba in the preceding four years, despite the U.S. embargo on Americans' conducting business there. (Last month, Trump tightened restrictions on commerce and travel between the two nations.) Cuba has only one 18-hole golf course but thousands of miles of undeveloped coast. Russo says he has made a dozen trips to Cuba since '11 but says they were of a personal nature, including bird-watching with Larry Glick, the Trump Organization's executive vice president for strategic development.

The President has famously dismissed climate change as a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese while also calling it "pseudoscience" and "total bull----." But citing the rapid erosion of its dunes and ocean frontage, Trump International Golf Links & Hotel Ireland petitioned County Clare in May 2016 to build a two-mile, 200,000-ton seawall that would be as high as 15 feet on the picturesque, crescent-shaped Doughmore beach. The permit application stated, "Predicted sea level rise and more frequent storm events will increase the rate of erosion throughout the 21st century." The application expired when the Trump Organization failed to complete the paperwork, but the company is putting together a new proposal with two smaller seawalls. (Meanwhile, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency has objected to the Trump Organization's plans to build a second course in Aberdeen, named after Mary MacLeod, citing environmental concerns.) The threat to his seaside golf courses—including the two existing ones in Scotland—may yet influence Trump's thinking about climate change.

For all the questions and complications that come with the President's golf empire, he still finds respite on the course and at his properties. Shortly after the presidential motorcade had left the U.S. Women's Open, Eric Trump told SI that his father "was so relaxed, he was having so much fun. It was nice for him to be outside of Washington, D.C." And yet for the President, politics and golf are now inextricably linked. During the Open, one of the few players to enjoy an audience with him was Sandra Gal, a member of the European Solheim Cup team from Germany. He quizzed her about the speed of the greens, thickness of the rough and other details about how his course was playing. "I asked him how he was doing," Gal says, "and he said, ‘This Russia stuff is nasty business. Much nastier than trying to make a three-foot putt.'"

NEWSLETTER SIGNUP
PRIVACY POLICY
TERMS OF USE
AD CHOICES
CUSTOMER SERVICE
© 2017 Ti Golf Holdings Inc. All Rights Reserved.