Bloomberg the Company & Its ProductsBloomberg Anywhere Remote LoginBloomberg Terminal Demo Request



Home  Home Home	Bloomberg Businessweek  Bloomberg	Share on Facebook  Facebook Share on Twitter  Twitter
How Two Brothers Turned Seven Lines of Code Into a $9.2 Billion Startup

Now, Stripe’s Patrick and John Collison are teaming with Amazon to grab even more control over the global flow of commerce.
By Ashlee Vance 2017年8月2日 GMT+8 上午12:00

 Patrick (left) and John. PHOTOGRAPHER: BALAZS GARDI FOR BLOOMBERG BUSINESSWEEK
Every day, Americans spend about $1.2 billion online. That figure has roughly doubled in the past five years, according to the Department of Commerce, and it’s likely to double again in the next five as the internet continues to devour traditional retail. So it might come as a surprise that the web’s financial infrastructure is old and slow. For years, the explosive growth of e-commerce has outpaced the underlying technology; companies wanting to set up shop have had to go to a bank, a payment processor, and “gateways” that handle connections between the two. This takes weeks, lots of people, and fee after fee. Much of the software that processes the trans­actions is decades old, and the more modern bits are written by banks, credit card companies, and financial middlemen, none of whom are exactly winning ­hackathons for elegant coding.

In 2010, Patrick and John Collison, brothers from rural Ireland, began to debug this process. Their company, Stripe Inc., built software that businesses could plug into websites and apps to instantly connect with credit card and banking systems and receive payments. The product was a hit with Silicon Valley startups. Businesses such as Lyft, Facebook, DoorDash, and thousands that aspired to be like them turned Stripe into the financial backbone of their operations.
The company now handles tens of billions of dollars in internet transactions annually, making money by charging a small fee on each one. Half of Americans who bought something online in the past year did so, probably unknowingly, via Stripe. This has given it a $9.2 billion valuation, several times larger than those of its nearest competitors, and made Patrick, 28, and John, 26, two of the world’s youngest billionaires.
But payments is a brutal battleground. Countless startups, big banks, and companies such as Google Inc. and Apple Inc. are trying to grab what pennies they can with their own systems. This competition, combined with the industry’s minuscule profit margins, has left pundits asking whether Stripe’s lofty appraisal makes sense. “We’re a ways out before they can satisfy that valuation,” says Brendan Miller, an analyst at Forrester Research Inc. “They’re valued higher than a lot of players who have been around for years with thousands of employees, tremendously more volume, and clients all over the world.”

Patrick in Ramallah during a tour of Israel and Palestine.PHOTOGRAPHER: GUY MARTIN FOR BLOOMBERG BUSINESSWEEK
One way to justify the number: Stripe’s new partnership with Amazon. com Inc., the largest and most sought-­after customer on the internet. Over the past couple of weeks, Stripe began handling a large, though undisclosed, portion of Amazon’s transactions. Neither company will address the scope of the deal—which was only revealed by Stripe’s addition of Amazon’s logo to its website—but it could help Stripe greatly increase its trans­action volume. (Amazon had no comment.)
Seven years in, however, Stripe’s mission is less to send more books, vacuums, and grooming kits into the world than to “increase the GDP of the internet,” Patrick says. To do this, the company is beginning to move beyond payments by writing software that helps companies retool the way they incorporate, pay workers, and detect fraud. It’s part of an ambitious bid to revamp how online business has been conducted for 20 years and to give anyone with a bright idea a chance to compete. “We think giving two people in a garage the same infrastructure as a 100,000-person ­corporation—the aggregate effects of that will be really good,” Patrick says.
The Collison brothers were born in Limerick and moved around as kids before settling in Dromineer, an idyllic village in central Ireland. Their parents had scientific backgrounds—father Denis in electrical engineering, mother Lily in microbiology—then became entrepreneurs. Denis ran a 24-bedroom hotel on the shore of Lough Derg, while Lily operated a corporate training company from the family’s home. “Entrepreneur is a long, fancy French word, but it didn’t seem like something you aspire to,” Patrick says. “It seemed normal, because whatever your parents do seems normal.”
The boys went to a school with fewer than 20 kids per grade. When bored in class, Patrick read books. “I would line up the angles so I was hidden from the teacher’s view,” he says, adding that he found out years later that an enlightened principal had instructed teachers to allow it. Patrick spent his last year studying at home so he could take the required standardized tests early and graduate at 16. (“Surely the smartest redhead in Ireland,” read one headline about 16-year-old Patrick being named Young Scientist of the Year for developing a programming language and artificial intelligence system.) He condensed what’s normally a two-year test-taking process into a 20-day period in which he aced 30 exams. Then he ran a marathon to celebrate.

John at Stripe’s San Francisco headquarters.PHOTOGRAPHER: BALAZS GARDI FOR BLOOMBERG BUSINESSWEEK
Patrick enrolled at MIT in 2006 based on an SAT he took at 13; John followed him to America, attending Harvard a couple of years later. In their spare time, they developed iPhone apps. One of their first hits was an $8 version of Wikipedia that people could search offline—the brothers stripped out superfluous coding so the whole thing could fit in a downloadable file. They also helped create a way to manage EBay auctions and sold that company, Auctomatic Inc., for $5 million in 2008.
The brothers dropped out of college and in late 2009 started noodling on the idea that would become Stripe. They set up an office in Palo Alto, which happened to be across the street from the old digs of transaction titan PayPal Inc. The Collisons would ride bikes to the office, sweating after trying to set personal bests. Part of this was competitiveness, and part of it was being too cheap to buy a car, says Mike Moritz, one of PayPal’s first investors. “They have the advantage of coming to California without being tainted and polluted by what’s in the water supply and air of Silicon Valley,” says Moritz, a partner at Sequoia Capital and a Stripe board member. “They’re more humble and well-rounded. There’s such an improbability to their story—that these brothers from a little village would come to build what could well be one of the most important companies on the internet.”
Stripe made its debut in 2011 with Patrick as chief executive officer and John as president. The Collisons had spent two years testing their service and forming relationships with banks, credit card companies, and regulators so customers wouldn’t have to. With Stripe, all a startup had to do was add seven lines of code to its site to handle payments: What once took weeks was now a cut-and-paste job. Silicon Valley coders spread word of this elegant new architecture.

Featured in Bloomberg Businessweek, Aug. 7, 2017. Subscribe now.PHOTOGRAPHER: BALAZS GARDI FOR BLOOMBERG BUSINESSWEEK
The genius of Stripe’s approach was twofold. Typically, finance managers decided what payment system to use. But Stripe appealed to developers, helping to solidify its importance in a startup’s early days. And its technology was crafted for the modern internet’s newfangled business models: Marketplace builders such as Shopify needed to divvy up payments between vendors and consumers, and sharing-economy upstarts such as Lyft had contractors and riders to move money between.
Setting up an accounting platform to pay Lyft drivers and charge millions of customers would have taken six months to build. “You have to keep track of who’s earning what, and the schedule they should be paid out on, and then you get into weird regulatory stuff,” John says. “The work that all these businesses had to do to manage payments was a shared toil. We could take on much more of that and leave running the business to them.”
Although startups appreciated what Stripe was doing, most potential investors did not. How was a small group of young engineers going to alter the internet’s financial structure? Hadn’t they heard of PayPal? Ironically, it was Moritz and PayPal co-founders Peter Thiel and Elon Musk who wanted in. They got that its technology hadn’t kept pace. “The propeller of the good ship PayPal was pretty encrusted, and a lot of barnacles had formed on the hull since we invested in the company more than a decade earlier,” Moritz says. “The observation that accepting payments was still too difficult rang very true.”
Today, Stripe is the financial engine for more than 100,000 businesses. It stores key financial information such as credit card numbers, deals with fraud, and adds support for new services such as Apple Pay as they arise. Stripe charges a 2.9 percent fee on credit card payments in exchange for its services, though the fee can be lowered with higher volumes. Stripe won’t disclose the number of transactions it processes, but analysts estimate it’s getting close to handling $50 billion in commerce annually, which would translate to about $1.5 billion in revenue. Stripe’s profit is what’s left over after banks charge it fees for their services. Generally, banks can take as much as 2.5 percent, but Patrick insists that Stripe has better margins than people assume, without providing further clarity.
The low margins point to an industry adage: There’s no money in payments. Stripe is in a vicious universe dominated by banks and credit card companies and larded with regulations. Still, it’s in competition to own nothing less than the flow of global trade, which is why there’s no shortage of participants.

Patrick visits Google’s event space in Tel Aviv.PHOTOGRAPHER: GUY MARTIN FOR BLOOMBERG BUSINESSWEEK
Stripe competes most directly with Braintree Payment Solutions LLC, a subsidiary of PayPal (Moritz, Musk, and Thiel sold PayPal to EBay in 2002), and the Dutch company Adyen B.V.—older rivals that teamed up with name brands Netflix, Airbnb, and Uber Technologies, which provide massive transaction volumes. Meanwhile, Square Inc. has focused on processing in-­person sales at retailers, Google and Apple have concentrated on smartphones, and ­companies such as Alibaba Group Holding Inc. have bespoke platforms. Old-guard payment ­processors—Chase Paymentech Solutions LLC, First Data Corp.—which contract with large, traditional ­retailers, have been trying to modernize their technology.
Stripe continues to attract startups. It intends to be behind the next Uber or Airbnb, to cash in on its meteoric growth. “If you think about the broad trajectory of the internet, most of the breakout successes are still to come,” Patrick says. But Stripe is also trying to make deals with Target Corp., Under Armour Inc., and other merchants to snag money available outside the startup scene, partnerships made more possible by the trust Amazon is showing.
In 2016, Stripe moved into offices next door to AT&T Park in San Francisco’s startup-heavy SoMa district. The previous tenant, file-sharing company Dropbox Inc., had tricked out the space with a bar, a music recording studio, a Lego room, and sofa swings. The Collisons got rid of all that. The kitchen, where Dropbox employees dined on individually plated meals, is now a standard cafeteria chow line. “It’s slow and indulgent to wait for food,” Patrick says.
On a spring day, pop music plays in the white-orchid-lined lobby. Coffee tables are layered with eclectic reading material including the Paris Review and the Twelve Tomorrows sci-fi anthology. There’s an open floor plan—of course—and workers change desks every few months to meet new people. An algorithm will select a lunch buddy for you to dine with at communal benches. A placard on the bathroom door reads: “We believe that gender is non-binary. Please use the restroom that feels most comfortable to you.”
Patrick’s desk is covered in books. There’s a copy of The Dream Machine, about J.C.R. Licklider, the technologist who conceptualized and funded the early internet. The volume was out of print, but Patrick loves it so much he bought the rights and paid to publish hundreds of copies for employees and guests. The wallpaper on his computer displays a countdown clock for his life: He has 52 years and a few days left. “This is a very coarse estimate, but it’s a reminder that you get old quickly,” he says, a touch of gray now in his red hair. “When you talk to people who are old, some wish they had enjoyed themselves more, but not many wish they had wasted more time.”
The brothers share a love for books and an apartment. They describe things in computing lingo. Patrick explains their lack of pop culture knowledge, saying: “It’s not that I don’t enjoy TV. If I had infinite time, I would watch it. This might be the entirely wrong optimization.” On weekends, John pays for a Stanford student to tutor him in law, and Patrick has a physics tutor. Conversations with them tend to move from Turkish politics to San Francisco’s water supply to the joys of aviation (they’re pilots).
When they’re not flying, they’re running and posting their times on Strava, a social network for people who like to brag about exercising. During company runs, Patrick lags behind to hang with the slowest person. Sometimes, John hands out pancake bundles at the end of early-morning jogs.
Three years ago, Stripe had 80 employees. Now it has 750. The company continues to try to cultivate its enlightened reputation among developers. Recently it hired Susan Fowler, whose blog alleging a corporate culture of sexual harassment at Uber set off an internal investigation. (Ultimately, CEO Travis Kalanick resigned.) At Stripe, Fowler oversees a quarterly publication, Increment, that collects stories on how engineers at other companies solved problems. Stripe also acquired Indie Hackers, a site that specializes in case studies about apps and software tools.
The Collisons’ plan is to bundle new tools into the core product to make that 2.9 percent fee seem ever-more reasonable. One feature, Radar, is a fraud-­detection system. Stripe uses AI software to analyze payments on its network and identify suspect activity. By looking at such a large data set, Stripe says it can spot patterns better than a single company reviewing its own transactions. Radar comes free, but Stripe wants to find ways to charge monthly fees for add-ons, such as customer support for larger clients. The goal is for this side of the business to look more like a traditional software company, with services helping high-profit payments roll in month after month.

Patrick walks through the Old City in Jerusalem.PHOTOGRAPHER: GUY MARTIN FOR BLOOMBERG BUSINESSWEEK
In May, Patrick went on a five-day tour of Israel to meet with investors and young entrepreneurs and tout these products. Much of the trip felt like he was still in Silicon Valley: At Google’s Tel Aviv office, he talked to startup founders amid “Tech It Easy” posters and potted plants with stickers reading “You are outstanding!”
Midway through the trip, he went to Ramallah, in the West Bank. About 50 people were at the offices of Leaders, a Palestinian organization that runs the region’s only technology park. The midafternoon call to prayer had just gone out, and a few men smoked on the balcony of the third-floor conference room that overlooked tan buildings, fields strewn with garbage and rocks, and a shepherd goading sheep. Patrick hopped up on a stool to address the crowd, saying, “I unfortunately don’t speak Arabic,” and apologizing for his rapid-fire brogue.
Much of the talk centered on Atlas, Stripe’s year-old service. For $500, a business can incorporate in Delaware, get a taxpayer number and U.S. bank account, and receive legal and tax advice on forming a company. Typically, this would require months of work, visits to the U.S., and lawyers. As it did with payments, Stripe simplified the process to a few clicks. A large number of Atlas customers are U.S. companies that want a quicker way to get up and running. But the majority of its clients are overseas, where the service helps with credibility, lower fees, and access to American customers and venture capital.
In Ramallah, entrepreneurs trying to build tech com­panies have had to contend with travel restrictions, a 2G cellular network, and poor access to investors. Odeh Quraan, 30, one of the Leaders attendees, runs Mostawda Inc., a Middle Eastern version of Etsy Inc. that links artisans and consumers from Morocco to Oman. Quraan uses Stripe to manage cross-­border payments and help online merchants fill stores with hijabs, labneh, and mosaics. He turned to Atlas to incorporate and is trying to attract foreign venture capital. “When I found Stripe, it seemed unbelievable,” Quraan says.
During his talk, Patrick explained to Quraan and the others that he could identify with feelings of isolation because of his upbringing in rural Ireland. “There is that sense of comparative inferiority,” he says. “You are clearly much less significant than the bigger forces around you.” Audience members told him they were set to deliver a petition with more than 100,000 signatures to PayPal chiding the company for allowing Israeli settlers to use the service but not Palestinians. Patrick countered that Stripe wants to expand its business in Palestine and anywhere else entrepreneurs need help, adding, “We are drawn by places that the rest of the world tends to underestimate.”


(Corrects Mike Moritz’s current title in the 10th paragraph.)
Terms of Service Trademarks Privacy Policy ©2017 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved
Careers Made in NYC Advertise Ad Choices Website Feedback Help


The New YorkerShopSign in|Link your subscription
A Reporter at Large
August 7 & 14, 2017 Issue
When Should a Child Be Taken from His Parents?
In family court, judges must decide whether the risks at home outweigh the risks of separating a family.

By Larissa MacFarquhar

Mercedes, a mother of four, has spent eight years trying to regain custody of three of her kids at the Bronx Family Court.Illustration by Anna Parini

What should you do if child-protective services comes to your house?
You will hear a knock on the door, often late at night. You don’t have to open it, but if you don’t the caseworker outside may come back with the police. The caseworker will tell you you’re being investigated for abusing or neglecting your children. She will tell you to wake them up and tell them to take clothes off so she can check their bodies for bruises and marks. She will interview you and your kids separately, so you can’t hear what she’s asking them or what they’re saying. She opens your fridge and your cabinets, checking to see if you have food, and what kind of food. She looks around for unsafe conditions, for dirt, for mess, for bugs or rats. She takes notes. You must be as calm and deferential as possible. However disrespectful and invasive she is, whatever awful things she accuses you of, you must remember that child protection has the power to remove your kids at any time if it believes them to be in danger. You can tell her the charges are not true, but she’s required to investigate them anyway. If you get angry, your anger may be taken as a sign of mental instability, especially if the caseworker herself feels threatened. She has to consider the possibility that you may be hurting your kids, that you may even kill one of them. You may never find out who reported you. If your child has been hurt, his teacher or doctor may have called the state child-abuse hotline, not wanting to assume, as she might in a richer neighborhood, that it was an accident. But it could also have been a neighbor who heard yelling, or an ex-boyfriend who wants to get back at you, or someone who thinks you drink too much or simply doesn’t like you. People know that a call to the hotline is an easy way to blow up your life. If the caseworker believes your kids are in imminent danger, she may take them. You may not be allowed to say goodbye. It is terrifying for them to be taken from their home by a stranger, but this experience has repercussions far beyond the terror of that night. Your children may hear accusations against you—you’re using drugs, your apartment is filthy, you fail to get them to school, you hit them—and even if they don’t believe these things they will remember. And, after your children see that you are powerless to protect them, this will permanently change things between you. Whatever happens later—whether the kids come back the next week, or in six months, or don’t come back at all—that moment can never be undone.
The caseworker has sixty days to investigate the charges against you. She will want you to admit to your faults as a parent, and you should, because this tells her you have insight into your problems and that you have a sincere desire to accept her help and change your life. But you should admit only so much, because she is not just there to help you: she is also there to evaluate and report on you, so anything you say may be used against you in court. The Administration for Children’s Services—A.C.S., as child-protective services is known in New York City—has to prove its allegations against you only by “preponderance of the evidence.” It can bring in virtually anything as evidence—an old drug habit, even if you’ve been clean for years; a D.U.I.; a diagnosis of depression. While the court case is proceeding, you may be asked to submit to drug testing or a mental-health evaluation, to attend parenting classes or anger-management classes or domestic-violence classes and some kind of therapy. These services are intended to help you, but, if you want to get your kids back, they are not really voluntary, even though they may be so time-consuming and inflexibly scheduled that you lose your job. The more obedient you are, the better things will go for you. Even if you are innocent and can prove it, it could be more than a year before you get a hearing, and during those crucial months your compliance and deference are the currency that buys you visits with your children.
When should you take a child from his parents?
You must start your investigation within twenty-four hours of the hotline call. Go at night—people are more likely to be home. As you look around, you have to be very, very careful, because if you miss something it will be partly your fault if a child ends up hurt, or dead. You may be shocked by the living conditions you encounter, but you’re not allowed to remove children solely because of poverty—if, for instance, there’s no food in the kitchen because the parent’s food stamps have run out—only for “imminent risk” due to abuse or neglect. But it’s often difficult to draw a line between poverty and neglect. When a child has been left alone because his mother can’t afford childcare and has to go to work, is that poverty or neglect? What if the child has been injured because there wasn’t an adult there to prevent it? Unless you’ve become desensitized through repetition, emergency removals are awful. Parents may scream at you and call you terrible names. Sometimes a parent will get violent. When you suspect in advance that a situation is going to be dicey, you can bring a colleague or a police officer, but sometimes things turn very fast and you’re on your own. If you remove the children that night, you will take them to a processing center to be assigned to a temporary foster home. Once you get there, it could take a long time for a home to be found—many hours. The children sit and wait, along with other children in the same situation. They may be crying, but it’s unlikely you will be able to comfort them, because you may never have met them before, and you have just separated them from their parents. If the children ask you where they’re going next, or when they’ll go home, or if they’ll stay together with their brothers and sisters, you can’t answer them, because you don’t know.
“This time, I’ll ask them to write ‘Not a Piñata’ on it in bigger letters.”
After that first visit, you have sixty days to investigate the charges. You should interview the child’s teacher, his pediatrician, and anyone else you think relevant. You should seek out neighbors and relatives; they may be too wary to talk to you, or else so eager to talk that you suspect they’re trying to get the parent in trouble. You must also draw out the parent herself; this is tricky, because you must play two conflicting roles—helper and investigator. Even if you feel for the parent and believe her kids should not be taken away, that is not the end of the story, because the final decision to ask in court for the removal of children is not yours to make; your supervisor, or your supervisor’s manager, will make it. Even though this manager has likely never met the parent or her kids, she may override your recommendation and take what she believes to be the safer course of action. Many at A.C.S. believe that taking kids from their parents is the cautious thing to do. Nobody wants to end up on the front page of the Daily News. You are working to protect children, and you will remind yourself of that when your job gets really difficult. Maybe once or twice a parent will thank you, and tell you that the services you provided made a difference in her life, and you will feel that those thanks make up for all the other parents who cursed at you and called you a baby snatcher. But that’s unlikely. The turnover among A.C.S. caseworkers is very high.
This is how Mercedes describes what happened. She was running a bath for her children. It was 2009, so Leslie was eleven months old and Camron was two. (To protect her kids’ privacy, Mercedes provided pseudonyms.) She plugged in her curling iron, because she was planning to curl and wrap her hair while they were in the tub. The kids were playing with toys in the living room. She left the curling iron on the side of the sink and went to fetch towels. She heard crying and, running back to the bathroom, she saw that Leslie had pulled the hot curling iron off the sink by its dangling cord, and it had fallen on her legs and burned them. She looked at the burns and they weren’t blistering, so she figured they were O.K.
The next day, at her cousin’s house, she saw that the burns had blistered, and announced that she was going to take Leslie to the E.R., but her aunt told her, Do not go to the E.R. If they see those burns, child services will take your kids. So she didn’t. The next day, she went to her mother’s house. She and her mother started fighting, as they usually did, and she left the apartment with Leslie and sat with her outside. It was a warm night. She saw two women she didn’t know walk past her and into the building. Her mother called her phone and told her to come upstairs. The two women were in her mother’s apartment; they told her they were from A.C.S., and had come to see what happened to the baby.
She answered a few questions, growing increasingly outraged, and then, guessing her mother had called A.C.S. to get back at her, began cursing at her and screaming that she would never see her grandchildren again. She started putting on Leslie’s clothes to leave, but the A.C.S. women told her that first they had to take photographs of Leslie’s burns. Mercedes said no, she was going, and one of the women said, Miss, you are making me real nervous right now. The women left, but a few minutes later they came back, accompanied by a couple of policemen. Mercedes sat on the floor crying, holding Camron and Leslie and begging the women, Don’t take my kids, please don’t take my kids. But her mother, believing it was best to comply, picked up Camron and then Leslie and gave them to the women, both kids wailing, and the women took them away.
Mercedes grew up in Brooklyn. Her father was a drunk, who beat her and her mother. One time he nearly killed them, trying to run their car off the road as they fled from him on the Belt Parkway. When Mercedes was old enough to understand what was going on, she started calling the cops on him. When she was older still, she started running away, at which point her mother called the authorities on her. When she was a teen-ager, her mother sat the kids down and they voted on whether they should kick their father out of the house. Mercedes’s younger brother, who was six, voted no, but Mercedes and her older brother and her mother voted yes, so her father left. Mercedes got pregnant when she was fourteen, but her boyfriend beat her up and she lost the baby. When she was eighteen she got pregnant again. Her father turned up and beat her, but she didn’t miscarry, and in 2007 she had her first baby, Camron.
Camron’s father had told her to get an abortion, and was violent with her, too, so her mother came and brought her home. “She told me, ‘I’m going to help you with the baby, I got you,’ ” Mercedes says. But although Mercedes and her mother were best friends when they weren’t living together—they talked every day on the phone, spent every weekend together—when they were in the same house they fought constantly, and when Camron was eight months old Mercedes’s mother threw her out, so Mercedes and the baby moved into a shelter. When she got pregnant again, with Leslie, the same thing happened: she moved in with her mother and then ended up in a shelter again six months later. It was in this second shelter that the incident with the curling iron occurred.
At the Bronx Family Court, A.C.S. argued that Mercedes had burned Leslie with the curling iron on purpose, but the judge was not persuaded. Rejecting the charges of abuse, she issued a lesser finding of neglect, because Mercedes had failed to supervise her children properly and had not taken Leslie to the hospital. The children were put into foster care with Mercedes’s cousin, and Mercedes set about doing what A.C.S. told her she had to do to get them back—going to parenting class, submitting to inspections by a caseworker. By this time, she was pregnant again. “The first thing that caseworker said to me when she met me was not ‘Hello’ but ‘Oh, you’re pregnant again? They ain’t going to do nothing but take that baby, too.’ That was the first thing that came out of her mouth.” But the caseworker was wrong: shortly before Mercedes gave birth to her third child, Tiana, the judge gave Camron and Leslie back to Mercedes, on the condition that she live with her mother.
A.C.S. was still uneasy about Mercedes, however. Right after Tiana was born it requested that the court find “derivative neglect” of Tiana by Mercedes, on the ground that she had been found to neglect Camron and Leslie, and argued that all three children should be taken into foster care. It pointed out that Mercedes’s home had been observed to be unsanitary on at least two occasions, that she had refused to participate in drug treatment despite admitting that she smoked marijuana “whenever I get the urge,” and had missed two child-safety conferences, and therefore posed an imminent risk to Tiana’s life or health. But the children’s attorney argued that Mercedes should be allowed to keep the baby, and the judge agreed.
Six months later, A.C.S. filed another petition to remove the children: Leslie had cellulitis and eczema, and Tiana was seriously underweight, and A.C.S. argued that the persistence of these problems suggested that Mercedes was failing to care for them properly. The judge pointed out that since Tiana had not gained weight even during a two-week stay in the hospital, it was not clear that Mercedes had anything to do with it. (Years later, Tiana was given a diagnosis of growth-hormone deficiency.) Moreover, she said, there was a strong bond between mother and infant, the disruption of which would only make things worse. Three months after that, A.C.S. tried to remove Tiana a third time, but again the judge said no.
“I’m going to level with you, Tom. The rest of the marketing team wasn’t sent upstate to live on a farm.”
Mercedes fought with her mother and moved with the kids to a shelter again, but there were bedbugs, so she left. The next day she took Leslie and Tiana to the doctor, and he told her they were so sick he wanted to admit them both to the hospital. For a couple of nights she and Camron slept in the girls’ hospital room, but the hospital kicked them out. Then, soon afterward, Mercedes’s mother and a woman friend of hers from church turned up at the hospital, along with a caseworker from A.C.S. The caseworker told Mercedes that since she didn’t have anywhere for Camron to go she had to give him to either her mother or the friend, or else A.C.S. would take all three kids. As Mercedes understood the arrangement, the caseworker promised her that, if she gave up Camron temporarily, then when the girls were released from the hospital A.C.S. would get the family on a priority list for proper housing and she would get Camron back. Mercedes desperately needed housing, and she didn’t have anywhere else for Camron to go, so she said O.K. Because she was still angry with her mother, she told the caseworker that Camron could go with the friend. That turned out to be the wrong decision.
Leslie was released from the hospital a few days later, and she was given to the friend, too. Mercedes kept calling A.C.S., asking when she was getting her kids back. Tiana was still in the hospital—were they waiting for her to be released? Why did she not have Leslie? When was she going to get her housing? What was going on? But now a caseworker was telling her that she had given up all three children of her own free will.
The judge on Mercedes’s case was Carol Sherman, who had worked in family court in various capacities for nearly forty years. As a law student, she had studied reformatories in Massachusetts and was appalled by what she saw—children being held in prisonlike conditions, with only the most rudimentary attempts at education—so when she graduated she looked for an organization that defended children in court. She found only one, the Juvenile Rights Division of the Legal Aid Society in New York, and went to work there in the summer of 1971. The reason she could find only one such organization was that, until a few years before, juvenile defense had not been thought necessary. The Progressive Era creators of family court had imagined its judges as quasi-parents, helping rather than punishing, ruling benevolently in a child’s best interest. But, in 1967, the Supreme Court ruled that it was irrelevant whether a judge felt benevolent or not: family court had the power to deprive citizens of their liberty, and that kind of state power had to be restrained by the law, so a juvenile delinquent was entitled to an attorney.
The mission to protect children, combined with the excitement of creating a whole new field of law, made the Juvenile Rights Division in the early seventies a thrilling place to be. Martin Guggenheim, now a professor of law at N.Y.U., arrived at the same time that Sherman did, and together they felt themselves to be part of a righteous crusade on behalf of their underage clients. “We defended murderers and muggers with zeal,” he says. “And if our client was found guilty and sent away, we’d say, That fucking judge. We were warriors!”
When Sherman and Guggenheim started out, their caseload was almost all delinquencies. But then growing awareness of “battered-child syndrome”—an awareness that the abuse of children at home was not a rare pathology but a frequent occurrence that demanded attention—led, in 1974, to the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act. The Juvenile Rights Division saw more and more abuse and neglect cases, and as this happened a divide opened among the warriors. To Sherman, it seemed clear that these new cases were very different—that whereas in the delinquency cases children accused of crimes had to be protected from the state, in the neglect and abuse cases the state itself was protecting children, from their parents. But to Guggenheim the child-welfare cases and the delinquency cases looked all too similar: in both, the state possessed the fearsome power to remove children from their homes, and so in both that power had to be kept in check.
By the time Sherman became a judge, in 2008, a great deal had changed in family court. In the eighties and nineties, putting children in foster care was very common: in 1991, there were nearly fifty thousand children in care in New York City. But study after study had shown how harmful foster care could be, and judges had become leery of it; by 2005, the number had dropped to eighteen thousand. (It is now under nine thousand.) But this didn’t mean that all the children who were no longer in foster care had stayed with their parents: many experts in the field had come to believe that the solution to the problem of children spending years in foster care was to speed up adoption. In 1997, Congress passed the Adoption and Safe Families Act, which required states to file for termination of parental rights in most cases when a child had been in foster care for fifteen of the previous twenty-two months. This gave parents far less time to satisfy child-protection agencies that they had adequately reformed, and made it far more likely that they would never get their children back.
Sherman knew that foster care could be harmful, so she felt more comfortable removing children if there was a relative who could pass a background check and take them—she believed that children almost always did better with family.
Sherman: Did the father sign the birth certificate at the hospital?
A.C.S.: I believe so.
Sherman: Does the mother have contact with the child?
A.C.S.: The mother attended the child safety conference but she became upset and walked out and told the father it was his baby now.
She worked tirelessly, aware that she now had more power than ever to affect children’s lives. She read every report in advance, she took detailed notes and reviewed them, she interrogated.
Sherman: I’d like to see the police report, this makes no sense. Where is the child?
A.C.S.: With the paternal grandmother.
Sherman: And what are you asking for today?
A.C.S.: The removal of the child to A.C.S.
Sherman: Based on the mother leaving the child alone on one occasion for thirty minutes?
A.C.S.: This is a very young child, less than seven months old, he cannot fend for himself.
Mother’s Lawyer: The very age of the child suggests that he should stay with the mother. She is breast-feeding, she has been his mother since birth.
Sherman: How do you know the child was left alone for thirty minutes?
A.C.S.: The child was found alone by the father’s brother.
Mother’s Lawyer: The child was left with the uncle.
Sherman: Wait, the father’s brother was home with the child?
A.C.S.: The brother stated that he came home and found the child.
Sherman: But why do you believe the brother over the mother? What do we know about him?
When it came to abuse, she tried to parse the different sorts of violence. Was the parent whipping with a belt, which was painful but not usually dangerous, or choking, which was? And why was the parent doing these things in the first place? “Is there mental illness?” she asks. “Is there so much anger that this person really can’t control it? It may be that this parent has every reason in the world to be angry, not at the child but at a whole host of experiences he’s had in his life—I’m not here to judge that. But how does that impact his ability to deal with his child? Young children can be really frustrating—the constant crying, not doing what you tell them to do.” Did the parent have an unrealistic idea of how well a young kid could be expected to behave? Or did he simply believe that hitting was the right way to raise a child? It was difficult to draw a line between corporal punishment and abuse, and judges drew that line in different places.
Sherman: The court does find that A.C.S. has met its burden. J. testified that his father beat him, punched him, and stomped on him, that he had been beaten by his father since he was two years old, and that he has seen his father hit C. This court is aware of Mr. A’s issues with anger control. The court is also aware that Mr. A cares very much for both of his children.
Some of the hardest cases were those in which a doctor did not believe a parent’s explanation of how a child had been hurt. It could be incredibly difficult to know what to do. “Often the injury can be horrific,” Sarah Cooper, another judge at the Bronx Family Court, says. “A skull fracture, a broken femur, retinal hemorrhaging, which is typical of a shaken baby. When there are these horrific injuries, everybody’s on edge. Who broke the baby? Somebody broke the baby. And often there are multiple caretakers—maybe two parents in a home, maybe a grandmother, an aunt, a babysitter. You have four people in front of you who are all held accountable, and the likelihood is one, maybe, did something, and two or three other people are just roped into it. But how do you say, O.K., take your baby home with their unexplained skull fracture? Nine months down the road we’re looking at a trial—medical experts come in and start lecturing about the ribs, genetic metabolic anomalies, brittle-bone disease, rickets—and that takes years. For a baby, that’s a lifetime—it’s all of the bonding, all of the early-life attachment. And ultimately perhaps we never know what happened.”
But abuse, in fact, made up only a small percentage of the cases that came through Sherman’s courtroom. The vast majority of child-protective cases involved neglect, and these could be even trickier. In a neglect case, it was a matter less of stopping something obviously terrible from happening than of filling in the deficits in a child’s life, and the question of what constituted a deficit big enough to count as neglect was difficult to settle. It was also hard to tell when neglect suggested that something more worrying was going on. “The question is, what else is this parent doing that their living conditions look like this?” Sherman would ask. “That they’re so filthy dirty, the children are filthy dirty, the food is rotting—what else is going on here? Is the parent depressed? Does the parent have developmental disabilities? Is there drug use? Or is it none of those things and we just have to teach her how to keep a clean home?” Figuring out what was really going on was hard, because she had no firsthand knowledge of the situation and was forced to rely on the testimony of caseworkers, whose skill and diligence varied considerably. She scolded them when their work was sloppy, but in the end she usually sided with A.C.S.
Sherman became known in family court for examining the tiniest of details. When inquiring how a child was doing, she wanted to know everything there was to know about him. “I want to see every report card, and if the child isn’t doing well in school I order tutoring in the home,” she says. “I will order P.S.A.T. and S.A.T. review courses. Information about scholarships. My experience is that unless I give a very detailed order the things that need to be done won’t necessarily get done.” She was notorious among caseworkers for her obsession with summer camp: if a child was not enrolled by the middle of spring, she would issue an order requiring it. She found out that one boy loved science but had never been to the natural-history museum, so she issued a court order requiring his foster mother to take him there. When he was adopted, she bought him a book about atoms and tickets to the planetarium to celebrate. Although she issued dozens of orders in every case, she kept track of all of them, and excoriated the caseworkers when they weren’t carried out. Some judges seemed to be concerned chiefly that their cases proceeded according to schedule; Sherman was not one of them. “Judge Sherman cares very deeply for children,” Mary Anne Mendenhall, Mercedes’s lawyer, says. “That is something you can never doubt.”
Sherman would often say, “All the children before me are entitled to everything that my child’s entitled to.” To her, this was a matter of social justice: she believed that it was not right for poor children to be deprived of the after-school activities and therapy and evaluations and tutoring and domestic orderliness that middle-class children had, so when a child came into her purview she did her utmost to insure that the child’s life and prospects were substantially improved before she was done with him. The trouble was, what to her seemed like helpful services could feel to a parent like intrusion, and the high standards she set could become barriers to reunification. “It moved into social control very quickly, in her courtroom,” Emma Ketteringham, the managing director of the Family Defense Practice at the law firm the Bronx Defenders, says. “I will never forget one case where a case planner had put in her report that there was a lot of stuff in the crib. Judge Sherman issued an order that nothing be allowed in the crib except the baby.”
Mother’s Lawyer: My client did not accept the cleaning service because she’s about to be evicted so she didn’t see the point.
Sherman knew that services didn’t always work, and that parents often resented them, but her job was to protect children, so she did the best she could with the tools she had. What else could she do? “Mental-health services, drug treatment—sometimes they’re beneficial, sometimes not,” she says. “There are old studies on batterers’ programs which said they did not have much of an impact. People are trying to figure out what can we do—we have to change people’s behavior. I think just being brought to court and having a child removed has a very sobering effect. But some parents are willing to say, I’d like to learn a better way to do it, and others are not.”
“Carol does not see intervention as a terrible cost,” Guggenheim says. “She sees it as a price to pay to avoid what is for many in this field the thing to avoid above all else: wrongfully failing to protect a child. She really has a Progressive mind-set, in that she sees herself as the instrument of power to improve children’s lives. But, on the privileged side of town in all parts of America, children are raised by drunks, by drug addicts, by violent people. We don’t care how privileged children are raised, because we’ve arranged our world around the fundamental principle that the state doesn’t intrude on the family. Equality requires that we give the same freedom to underprivileged children as we give to privileged children—to be raised by crappy parents.”
“We don’t know what kind of meat it is. That’s why it’s on sale.”
For a long time after she lost her children, Mercedes was homeless. She couldn’t sleep at her mother’s anymore, and she didn’t have close friends, so she floated from place to place, staying in each as long as her host would let her, sometimes staying with someone she had met that day. She refused to go to a shelter for single women—she had heard there were fights in those places, and people stole things. She was used to this. Her life had been this way since she was sixteen—staying with her mother, getting thrown out, staying with a friend, getting in an argument, moving on. Besides, she didn’t have her kids, so she barely cared what happened to her. “When they take your kids, it’s like everything stops,” she says. “Your heart stops. Everything stops. Then you’re trying to figure out what the hell to do next. What do I do? Once they take them, you don’t have no reason to be here no more. Your kids give you purpose.”
She was permitted to see her children each week in a room at the foster-care agency, but she came to dread these visits, because they were so short and saying goodbye was awful for everyone, and because someone from the agency would watch them, taking notes on how she and the kids behaved together. But mostly she dreaded them because the kids had started saying things about her. They said that their foster mother had told them that Mercedes was bad, that she was a drug addict, that she didn’t want them back. Mercedes started coming late to visits, and sometimes she wouldn’t show up at all, and the kids would get very upset. Sherman ruled that if Mercedes was late for a visit it would be cancelled, and Mercedes was late. She was late for court dates, too. “Mercedes has no sense of time,” her mother says. “I tell her, Don’t leave when you feel like it, stop getting up when you feel like it, you got to be in court at twelve, how dare you get there when it’s over?” The foster agency warned the foster mother not to disparage Mercedes in front of the children, but she continued to do it. (A.C.S., Judge Sherman, and the foster agency all have a policy of not discussing open cases.)
Before she took in Mercedes’s kids, the foster mother had been earning a little money cleaning houses and watching people’s children, but now she began receiving foster-care benefits. Mercedes’s children were medically complicated, so the payments were higher than usual. For “special children” in New York, foster parents are paid up to $1,289 a month; for “exceptional children,” the payment is $1,953; so to take care of all three of them the foster mother was likely being paid between forty-six and sixty-two thousand dollars a year, plus up to seventeen hundred dollars a year in clothing allowance. If she ended up adopting the children, she would receive benefits until each child turned twenty-one.
She wanted to adopt them. In the past, foster parents often did not want to adopt, so if a parent’s rights were terminated the children were forced to go to yet another home. To overcome this problem, the foster agency that was supervising Mercedes’s children had a policy of encouraging foster parents to consider adoption. The trouble with this solution was that foster parents were prompted from the start to form attachments to the children, and their hopes were pitted against those of the biological parents.
While the case dragged on and Mercedes drifted, the agency was helping the foster mother with housing. “They done moved this lady three times, and every time the apartment’s getting bigger,” Mercedes said bitterly. “But you can’t help the biological mother who’s showing you that she wants her kids? If they would have done that for me in the first place, I wouldn’t be in the situation that I’m in now, and I’d have my kids.” Between constantly moving from place to place and feeling that A.C.S. had it in for her, and wasn’t going to return her kids no matter how hard she tried or how many parenting classes she enrolled in, Mercedes had started to fray. “By this time, I’m tired. I love my kids, but I’m tired. My mind is tired. My body is tired. I keep getting—excuse my language—dicked around by A.C.S. They’re lying to me, they’re being disrespectful. So I start to disappear for a while.”
Every time she came to court she felt surrounded by people who were convinced that she was a bad mother and a bad person, although they barely knew her. “At one point, we had a court date when the lawyer for the foster-care agency first came on,” she says. “And when we met outside he kept saying, ‘Oh, you’re really clean.’ What the fuck does that mean? ‘I don’t see nothing wrong with you, you look clean.’ Because I’m black I’m supposed to be dirty?” She would sit in the courtroom resentfully listening to the caseworker note when she’d been late to a visit, or missed a therapy appointment, but not mention when the foster mother was late, or when she missed the kids’ doctors’ appointments, or that she had been telling the kids terrible and untrue things about their mother. The lawyers only ever brought up the bad stuff about her, she felt; never the good. One time when she was at a conference at the foster-care agency, Leslie burst into the room and said, “I have an announcement to make—I love my mommy”; and then next time they were in court there was Leslie’s attorney advocating against reuniting her with her mother, and there was no mention of what Leslie had said until Mary Anne Mendenhall, representing Mercedes, brought it up.
The judge kept saying she understood Mercedes, because they had been encountering each other in court for years, but she knew only a few things about her life. “It always bothered Mercedes when Judge Sherman would look at her and say, ‘I know you very well,’ ” Mendenhall says. “Mercedes would walk out crying and say, ‘She doesn’t know me! She only knows what they say about me! She’s never talked to me, she doesn’t know anything about who I am.’ Just because of the number of pages she’d read about Mercedes, to feel entitled to look her in the eye and say, ‘I know you very well.’ I don’t think Judge Sherman recognized what that meant to Mercedes. And how wrong it was. And how many times she said it.”
Mary Anne Mendenhall worked at the Bronx Defenders, on East 161st Street, a few blocks from the courthouse. She and her colleagues represented parents in family court, and so they often found themselves at odds with A.C.S. and the foster-care agencies. They believed that A.C.S. frequently drew the line between neglect and poverty in the wrong place—that parents lived in unsafe apartments without enough food and left their children home alone because they had no choice. What was required much of the time, the defenders believed, was not parenting classes but material assistance—housing, childcare, medication, food. They also believed that family court was racist. Why, when the Bronx was forty per cent white, were nearly a hundred per cent of their clients black or Latino? Why was the percentage of the population in foster care twice as high in the Bronx as it was on Staten Island? They believed that child protection had become for black women what the criminal-justice system was for black men.
“I guess we’ll know ol’ Mr. Willis is dead when the Amazon packages stop arriving.”
New lawyers at the Bronx Defenders are asked to stay for three years, and many of them leave as soon as that time is up. A defender in family court will have between seventy-five and ninety clients at a time; each of these clients is in the middle of one of the most painful crises of her life and is depending on her lawyer to get her out of it, and much of the time the lawyer will fail. Almost all desperately want their children back, but some can’t seem to do even the simpler things that A.C.S. requires of them, like being on time for appointments. The defenders ask their clients to do these things—they explain that, even if they may not have anything to do with being a good parent, they are what the system demands and are the quickest way to get their kids back—but if their clients still don’t do them they have to accept it. “Many of these people have been supervised their whole lives, threatened their whole lives,” Mendenhall says. “If you don’t da-da-da, you’re going to get kicked out of class. If you don’t da-da-da, I’m going to suspend you. And they don’t care. So when I say, If you would just stop smoking marijuana we’d be done with this, they’re probably thinking something like, Do your job—you know I’m not hurting my kids.” There is a saying at the Bronx Defenders: You can’t work harder than your client, and you can’t want it more.
Some clients are constantly in touch, texting, calling, pleading for help. Others disappear and have to be tracked down—they don’t have a fixed home, their phones run out of minutes, they get a new number and forget to mention it. Bronx Defenders who previously worked in criminal court are befuddled by this: they usually knew where their clients were—in jail.
In criminal court, defense lawyers have an established function that everyone understands, but in family court a parent’s attorney who puts up a real fight is still a novelty. Ten years ago, most parents were represented by individual public defenders who were too harried to get to know their clients and often deferred to A.C.S. Even now, the old assumptions of benevolence persist. Although judges know in principle that hearings are adversarial, they may feel that in practice they and the lawyers should be on the same team—after all, everyone wants what’s best for the family. So they may feel affronted when a lawyer clearly doesn’t feel that way, or even seems to believe that other actors in the courtroom are taking their positions because they don’t understand—or don’t sympathize with—what it’s like to be poor. Judges and lawyers for A.C.S. and the foster-care agencies often complain that the Bronx Defenders are too aggressive, apt to make the whole process so nasty. But they are not the only aggressive ones. There’s a lot of yelling in family court—judges telling lawyers to shut up and sit down; judges scolding caseworkers for not doing their job; lawyers sniping at one another in barbed, formal language; parents shouting that accusations are untrue, or about the unfairness of the system.
Sometimes the Bronx Defenders worry that their aggression is bad for their clients. A contentious family court reinforces the belief that the interests of children and their parents can be separated, and this belief usually works to the detriment of the parents. The defenders feel that a large part of what the court and A.C.S. require from parents is compliance and deference, so will it harm their cases if their lawyers show neither? “There certainly are times when judges complain to me, ‘Why can’t you people get along with everybody? You’re doing your clients a disservice by not helping them to do what we’re asking,’ ” Emma Ketteringham says. “And I remind myself, We are not a nonprofit with a mission of reforming the system; our mission is to represent the parents. Now, that is always tricky, because we are members of this system which we all strongly believe is racist and classist and doing harm to the families it claims to serve. But, when it’s an individual client, the conversation must always be: If you invite that caseworker in who is so condescending and rude to you, doesn’t remember your children’s names and has everything wrong about you—if you invite her in and serve her food rather than give her attitude, your children will come home more quickly. It’s unlawful for us to prioritize fighting the system over advocating for our clients, because we have a duty of loyalty.” On the other hand, Ketteringham believes that the small fights they pick are, year by year, having a cumulative effect. “You will now hear judges turn to A.C.S. and say, ‘A parenting class? Really? Wait, domestic-violence therapy and regular therapy?’ That’s from us pushing. Ten years ago it was so much worse, in terms of the cookie-cutter services that everybody rolled their eyes about.”
So much about working in family court was maddening, it was small wonder that people got on each other’s nerves. It had always been that way, and it seemed it always would be, since, each time a solution to a problem was found, that solution seemed to generate new and worse problems of its own. A few years ago, everyone with a court date was told to show up at 9 a.m. and wait. Since it was unpredictable how long the earlier cases would take, a person might wait all day without seeing a judge and be told to come back the next day, which might mean losing his job; and, once started, a hearing would continue until it was finished, even if it took till eight or nine at night. This was bad for the people who worked at the court, bad for the people whose cases weren’t heard, and bad for the city’s budget, because it required so much overtime. So the court instituted “time certains,” so you could be reasonably sure that your case was going to be heard at a particular time, and it started shutting down promptly at four-thirty every day. But in order to keep to the time certains while moving each case along on the schedule mandated by law, hearings and trials had to be scheduled in short time slots—half an hour, an hour—spread out over the course of many months. In fact, most of the half-hour slots were closer to twenty minutes, because nearly ten minutes was spent trying to agree on a slot to meet the next time, with the judge and three or four lawyers and caseworkers all consulting their scheduling books and calling out when they could and couldn’t make it. And all those months spent piecing together the few hours required for a hearing or trial were months that removed children spent in foster care.
Then, there were the times when family court was even more tense than usual: after a gruesome and highly publicized murder of a child, people in child protection got very jittery and very cautious. More calls came in to the hotline, A.C.S. filed for more removals, and judges were more likely to grant them. What in normal times seemed like a small, ordinary mistake—forgetting to take a child to a doctor’s appointment, bringing him to school late, getting drunk in his presence—could, in the wake of a death, seem like a portent of danger. And you never saw headlines accusing caseworkers of removing children when they didn’t have to. Last October, the month after six-year-old Zymere Perkins died, allegedly at the hands of his mother and her boyfriend, foster-care placements increased by thirty per cent. Newspaper accounts of child deaths often suggested that A.C.S. workers had too many cases to do their jobs properly, but caseloads had been reduced over the years to a reasonable number—usually between eight and fifteen. It wasn’t that caseworkers had too many clients, but that what they were required to do—change human behavior, predict the future—was very hard.
With so many serious and intractable issues to deal with in family court, the Bronx Defenders found it particularly infuriating when A.C.S. would argue for removal based on something they felt was relatively trivial, like marijuana. “I remember one case where I was struggling with whether I was going to make a finding of neglect,” Ronald Richter, who was a family-court judge from 2009 to 2011, before serving as the A.C.S. commissioner, says. “The mother was smoking marijuana in the shelter bathroom while her baby was on the bed in the next-door room, and I just didn’t feel that the agency had proved harm to the child. The record was so spare. There was nothing to show that this mother—they wanted me to make all these inferences! And I struggled and struggled and struggled. Then the mother didn’t show up to court, and her lawyer had nothing to say, so I was able to draw a negative inference and I made a finding and I was so relieved that that settled it.”
It had become rare for a child to be removed solely because the parent was smoking marijuana, but if kids had already been removed and the parent tested positive it was often a reason not to give them back. This seemed to Mendenhall so grossly unreasonable that she would sometimes lash out at the A.C.S. lawyers in the hallway afterward. “Never say ‘marijuana’ again in this courthouse until you call the police on your friend from college who dares to smoke it when he has children at home,” she fumes. “One guy said to me, ‘My own friends’ and family’s marijuana use is neither here nor there.’ And I said, ‘How can that be? How can it be? If you really believe in what you’re saying.’ ” It was this double standard that galled her the most. Blaming parents for the side effects of poverty was bad enough, but to censure them for doing what middle-class people did all the time without any fear of prosecution was too much. There was no leeway, no give, no mercy at all, if you were poor. “I’m not in favor of corporal punishment,” she says. “I don’t plan to hit my children, if I ever have them. I assume I will at some point, though, because that’s how I was raised. I will be shocked at myself, and I will have the comfort and the privilege within my family of processing how I failed, and saying to my child, ‘I lost it, I’m really sorry.’ Our clients never have that privilege.”
She knew that A.C.S. lawyers and caseworkers had jobs to do, and that those jobs were necessary to protect children. But there was a certain personality type that inclined toward that kind of work. “One of the A.C.S. lawyers, a couple years ago I saw her on the train, and I had a dog at the time. My dog was sixteen and I kept her alive till she was seventeen—doing O.K. First thing that lawyer did was stick her finger in my dog’s collar and say, ‘It’s a little tight, Ms. Mendenhall.’ ”
Because A.C.S. continued to complain in court about Mercedes’s marijuana use, and because she hoped that a dramatic demonstration of compliance and sacrifice might convince them that she was determined to reform, in 2012 she enrolled in a yearlong in-patient drug-treatment program called La Casita. At first, it was hard. “I didn’t have no phone,” she says. “You got to get rid of everything—no nails, no hair, no makeup, nothing, you’re in there Plain Jane. I didn’t really understand the logic of why you got to take my weave out, or why I can’t wear earrings. I cried about my hair. They said, ‘To strip you down to nothing and build you back up.’ But you already feel like shit because your kids are in the system. Why would you want me to feel like nothing? I already feel like nothing.” She couldn’t believe she was there in the first place—she looked around and saw dope fiends and crackheads, and all she’d done was smoke some pot.
But then she grew close to a couple of the counsellors; she felt they understood her and gave her good advice. They believed in her and thought she should get her children back. Little by little, she started to unfurl. “Like most women that enter treatment, she didn’t trust, she came from a broken home, she was always fighting,” Yolanda Stevenson, one of the counsellors, says. “She was angry at herself, and at the system. I also think that she suffered from some form of depression, which was taboo for her. For a lot of African-Americans, we feel it’s taboo—we’re not crazy, why should we have therapy? But when you’re fighting with your mother like boxers, that’s a little off.” Mercedes felt that, after months of shutting down and running away from her life, this was her last chance, and she seized it.
Judge Sherman saw how hard she was trying, and how far she’d come, and said that the kids could visit her on weekends. She said that soon they’d be able to come for overnight visits, so La Casita moved Mercedes to a bigger room, with enough beds for all the kids to sleep there. Tiana was being fed through a tube into her stomach now, and Mercedes studied up on it so she would know how to take care of her. “I knew how to flush it, I knew how to mix it, I knew how to put the milk and cereal together and put the tube in and everything,” she says. Mendenhall argued that the only remaining barrier to reuniting the family was housing, and Sherman charged the foster-care agency with arranging it. The agency resisted—it believed that the children should be adopted by their foster mother—but she ordered it to comply. Now it was only a matter of finding an apartment: after three and a half years, it would be just a few more months before the family could be together.
That year—2013—Mercedes brought her kids to Thanksgiving dinner at her aunt’s house. “Thanksgiving was beautiful,” she says. “My aunt and my grandfather hadn’t seen Leslie, Camron, and Tiana since they were babies. We ate, we laughed, we talked. My aunt has one of them big dummies with no arms that they have in defense classes, and Camron was fighting that—they put boxing gloves on him and he went at it and had a ball. He was play-wrestling with my brother. Tiana, she was playing with toys with my cousin. Leslie was eating, talking to my mother, talking to my aunt.”
Then, two days later, the agency told Mercedes that Camron had said that during the Thanksgiving dinner she had taken him into the bathroom and punched him in the stomach while her mother held his shirt up. More accusations followed: Leslie said that she had been abused, sexually and otherwise, by Mercedes and other people in her family. Later, Camron admitted to Mercedes and a caseworker at La Casita that the punching at Thanksgiving hadn’t happened, that his foster mother had told him to say that, and the caseworker recorded his statement, but the foster-care agency said the statement sounded coerced.
“It’s amazing what you can see once you get away from all that light pollution.”
A.C.S. investigated each of these reports but pursued none of them in court. But as soon as one was closed another accusation would be made, and no reunion could take place before the new report was properly looked into. It seemed that nobody really believed that Mercedes had abused her children, because she was never arrested, and during this period she gave birth to a fourth child, Amaya, and Amaya was never taken away. But the reports continued. “I wish I could have helped Mercedes fight more, the way she was treated by the foster-care agency and the foster mother,” Yolanda Stevenson says. “I’ve been in this field for twenty-three years, and I get that her children were traumatized. But I think her kids were coached by the foster mother to say these things—‘Mommy beat me,’ or whatever.” Leslie started saying she’d been hit by any number of people in addition to her mother—by children on the school bus, by a teacher, by a teaching assistant in a school bathroom, by her foster parents. Sherman stopped the children’s unsupervised visits at La Casita, so Mercedes saw them at the foster-care agency again. But the foster mother reported that Mercedes sexually abused the children during those supervised visits.
Reports started coming in against the foster mother and her husband, too. There were several calls to the hotline from mandated reporters—people, such as teachers and social workers, who were obligated to report suspected abuse—accusing her or her husband of mistreating the children. “There were allegations of her hitting the son,” Stevenson says, “but they didn’t remove the kids, which blew my mind.” At first, Sherman didn’t hear of the accusations against the foster mother, because the foster agency didn’t mention them in court, and they were all ultimately deemed unfounded. When Sherman did hear, she berated the agency for not telling her sooner, but she decided that since it still seemed likely that the children would be reunited with their mother, they should not be moved to yet another home.
Even the agency was worried about what was going on. The agency itself had called in one of the maltreatment cases against the foster mother; it was concerned about her habit of filming the children when they were having tantrums. It also felt that her husband was not behaving enough like a father. When the caseworker visited, he would be in another room. She would tell him he had to come out and engage with the kids, especially since they wanted to adopt them, but he would say, “My wife does that.” The agency testified in court that there were incidents where the foster mother and her husband were very harsh with the children.
Mercedes had started missing visits again and turning up late, and after several warnings Judge Sherman became so concerned about the traumatizing effect her behavior was having on the children that she cancelled visits altogether. Mercedes was so far gone in despair by that point that she almost gave up. “They already made up in their mind that they’re not going to give them back,” she says. “I feel as though they want me to say, ‘Fuck it, let me just sign, take ’em.’ I get to that point. I get there. That’s why I’ve been late. I can be on time; but when I’m at home getting ready, I don’t see an end to this tunnel, I don’t see a light, it’s just pitch black, this is a fricking routine that is never going to fucking end, and I feel like I’m drowning all the time. Lord knows, I love my kids. But, at the end of the day, it’s only so much one person is willing to take.” She started crying. “I’ve dealt with everything. Everything they threw at me, I dealt with. After I busted my ass to make sure I got where I needed to be, they just snatched it back like it was nothing.”
The children grew worse and worse. Camron threatened to kill his foster mother and her husband, and the month after the Thanksgiving dinner, when he was six, he ended up in a psychiatric hospital. Later on, he started threatening to kill himself, too, and he was hospitalized again and again. When Camron was nine and in a psychiatric ward, his foster mother took the girls and went on a vacation that she had planned, so he was all alone. In previous years, Sherman had seemed to agree with the foster-care agency that Camron’s frightening behavior might be due to anxiety surrounding the visits with his mother, but now he hadn’t seen his mother in more than a year and he was far sicker, and she was growing skeptical that Mercedes could still be blamed for what was happening. Since she wasn’t allowed to visit Camron in the hospital, Mercedes called him on the phone the first day he was there, and he asked her to call him every day. She called the next day, and the next, but then the foster-care agency told the hospital that she was not allowed to have contact and her calls were blocked.
Camron reminded Mercedes of herself—he was angry and difficult, and she knew he was going to have a rough adolescence, as she’d had. “What I kept telling their foster mother is ‘You forget those are my kids,’ ” she says. “ ‘My blood is running through them. My attitude is running through them. I gave my mother hell. You ain’t never been through no shit like that, so you ain’t going to understand, you’re not going to get it. I will get it, because I been there. These are my kids.’ ” It seemed to Mercedes that the foster mother didn’t really want Camron—what kind of mother left a nine-year-old alone in a mental hospital and went on vacation? “I felt the foster mother treated the daughters better than the son,” Stevenson says. “When the kids would come to visit, you could tell he needed a haircut, his clothes were shabby, he didn’t smell the cleanest, so nobody was teaching him hygiene, but the girls looked like fashion models.” At one point, Mercedes wondered whether she could make a devil’s bargain with A.C.S. to give up Leslie and Tiana if they’d give her Camron—she thought that the foster mother seemed genuinely attached to the girls—but she just couldn’t do it.
By the spring of 2017, Mercedes hadn’t seen her children in nearly two years. She was living with Amaya in a shelter in Manhattan, near the F.D.R. Drive. “So much time has gone past, I don’t even know what my kids look like right now,” she said. “I look at them old pictures, I know Camron looks older. He’s taller. I know Leslie looks older and she’s taller. I don’t know what they look like.” The foster-care agency was advocating strenuously for adoption. The point of no return was getting closer.
The agency asked the court to place Camron in a long-term residential treatment facility. Mercedes went there and asked for a tour, and she emerged feeling it wasn’t as bad as she’d feared. When the foster agency gave her a stack of medication-consent forms to sign, she first Googled each of the drugs they wanted to give him. There were four or five of them, and she looked up the side effects, the tics he might develop if he missed a dose, the withdrawal symptoms he would go through if he stopped taking them. Some of the antipsychotics sounded scary to her, especially for a kid as young as Camron. “They want to put him on Risperdal—I won’t let them do that. That give boys breasts. Abilify? That’s fine, it calms you. They wanted to do the Ritalin for the A.D.H.D. Fine. The closer I can get to the organic stuff, I try to. I’ve seen him in the hospital after he’s woken up after they give him the shot to calm him down, and I don’t like what I see. He’s not responsive quick enough for me. He just sit there, his mouth open. He’s talking, but it’s like the lights is on but nobody’s home. And I’m, like, no. Unh-unh. No.”
“We’ll have to pick this up later. My plane just went down, sharks ate my personal assistant, and apparently I’m winning some kind of surfing competition.”
For Mercedes, spring was the hardest time of year, because of birthdays. Camron’s was March 21st, Tiana’s March 30th, Leslie’s May 5th. Each year, she braced herself for this dark period by going all out for Amaya’s birthday, in January. She would spend her food stamps on a birthday cake and they would celebrate together. “Your birthday is special,” she would tell her. “That’s the day you changed me. That’s the day you made me feel like I need to be here. Because I didn’t feel like I needed to be here for a long time. They always made me feel like my kids never needed me, they didn’t want me, they was better off with this lady. I just lost the will to live. It was like, whatever happened to me happened to me, I’m on the streets until whatever. But, when I saw Amaya, that was my purpose—to make sure she didn’t go into care. I made sure that that baby stayed with me, and I’m going to continue to make sure that my baby stay with me. I refuse to lose her. I fucking refuse to. They will have to kill me.”
“The reckless destruction of American families in pursuit of the goal of protecting children is as serious a problem as the failure to protect children,” Martin Guggenheim, Sherman’s former colleague, says. “We need to understand that destroying the parent-child relationship is among the highest forms of state violence. It should be cabined and guarded like a nuclear weapon. You use it when you must.” He believes the tide is turning in his direction—nine thousand children in foster care in New York City compared with fifty thousand, changing views on drugs—but each time a child is murdered by a parent some gain is lost. After the death of Zymere Perkins, last year, Mayor de Blasio spoke on the radio about the case. “Our mission is to save every child,” he said. “Unlike pretty much any other area in government—we do not set a standard for perfection in policing or so many other areas—in this case we do set a standard of perfection.” He said, “Our job is to get there first and intervene and stop it.”
In Dostoyevsky’s novel “The Brothers Karamazov,” Ivan asks his brother Alyosha to consider the murder of a child and what price he would pay to avert it.
“Imagine that you are creating a fabric of human destiny with the object of making men happy in the end, giving them peace and rest at last, but that it was essential and inevitable to torture to death only one tiny creature—that baby beating its breast with its fist, for instance—and to found that edifice on its unavenged tears, would you consent to be the architect on those conditions? Tell me, and tell the truth.”
“No, I wouldn’t consent,” said Alyosha softly.
Children are killed all the time. But when confronted with one particular dead child and asked if there is no limit to what we should do to prevent another from dying like that—if perfection should be the goal of child-protective services, and if the state should intervene before bad things happen, just in case—it is very difficult to say no, even if the price is other children and parents suffering while alive.
Mercedes knows that, at this point, she has very little chance of getting her kids back. She knows that they will probably grow up without her, and that she may not even be allowed to see them. The foster mother and Mercedes’s mother aren’t friends anymore. The photographs she has will get more and more out of date, and Camron, Leslie, and Tiana will become people she doesn’t know. What she hopes for now is that when they’re grown, when they’re adults and can do as they like, one day they will come and find her. “I will always be looking for that phone call, for that hit up on Facebook: ‘Mommy, what happened?’ ” she says. It will be years till then, but it’s been years already, and she’ll survive as long as she has Amaya. “I’m waiting for it,” she says. “I got time. Camron, that’s eight more years till he’s eighteen. Leslie is, what, nine more years. Tiana is six now. So I’m waiting for it. I’m waiting for it.” ♦
This article appears in other versions of the August 7 & 14, 2017, issue, with the headline “The Separation.”

Larissa MacFarquhar has been a staff writer at The New Yorker since 1998.Read more »
More:ChildrenFamiliesParenting

Sign up for our daily newsletter: the best of The New Yorker every day.

Enter your e-mail
Go

Most Popular

1.
News Desk
The Uncomfortable Truth About Affirmative Action and Asian-Americans
By Jeannie Suk Gersen
2.
Photo Booth
What Rampant Materialism Looks Like, and What It Costs
By Rebecca Mead
3.
News Desk
Why Is Donald Trump Still So Horribly Witless about the World?
By Robin Wright
4.
A Reporter at Large
The Intelligent Plant
By Michael Pollan
5.
Elements
How Silicon Valley’s Workplace Culture Produced James Damore’s Google Memo
By Anna Wiener
Our Thirty Most Popular

Video

The Youngest Elected Official in New York City
Ritchie Torres, who is twenty-eight years old, represents the Central Bronx in the New York City Council. His mantra is “If you do nothing, nothing will change.”
Recommended Stories

American Chronicles
Why Would You Adopt Twenty Kids?
Sue and Hector Badeau wanted to help children in need, but there were always more.

By Larissa MacFarquharJul. 27, 2015
A Reporter at Large
What Makes a Parent?
A brutal custody battle between two women raises questions about who has a right to rear a child—and could redefine the legal meaning of family.

By Ian ParkerMay 15, 2017
Daily Shouts
Trump Imagines Life as a Soldier
The movie “Saving Private Ryan” is about me.

By River CleggAug. 11, 2017
Listening Booth
The Recordings of Toscanini: Learning to Love the Maestro
At one point in an NBC Symphony broadcast you can hear Toscanini singing along, a mark of his engagement.

By Russell PlattAug. 11, 2017

Listen to the New Yorker Radio HourBuy the CoverPlay the Jigsaw Puzzle
News & Politics
Daily Comment
John Cassidy
Amy Davidson
Ryan Lizza
Benjamin Wallace-Wells
Culture
Cultural Comment
Culture Desk
Goings On About Town
The Critics
Jia Tolentino
Persons of Interest
Business, Science & Tech
Currency
Elements
Maria Konnikova
Humor
Daily Shouts
Shouts & Murmurs
The Borowitz Report
Cartoons
Daily Cartoon
Cartoon Caption Contest
Cartoon Bank
Books & Fiction
Page-Turner
Books
Literary Lives
Poems
Fiction
Magazine
This Week's Issue
Archive
Subscribe
Photography
Photo Booth
Portfolio
Video
Culture
Humor
Politics
Business
Science & Tech
Books
Sports
Podcasts
The New Yorker Radio Hour
Political Scene
The Writer's Voice
Fiction
Poetry
Out Loud
More
Customer Care
Buy the Cover
Apps
Jigsaw Puzzle
SecureDrop
Store
RSS
Site Map
Newsletters
The Daily
Culture Review
Podcasts
Cartoons
John Cassidy
The Borowitz Report
Fiction
Goings On About Town
About Us
About
Careers
Contact
FAQ
Media Kit
Press
Follow Us


The New YorkerShopSign in|Link your subscription

A Critic at Large
February 8, 2010 Issue
The Pathfinder
Sam Shepard and the struggles of American manhood.
By John Lahr

“I had a sense that a voice existed that needed expression,” Shepard said of his early plays.Photograph by Brigitte Lacombe

“I just dropped out of nowhere,” Sam Shepard said of his arrival in New York, at nineteen, in the fall of 1963. “It was absolute luck that I happened to be there when the whole Off-Off Broadway movement was starting.” Shepard, a refugee from his father’s farm in California, had spent eight months as an actor travelling the country by bus with a Christian theatre troupe, the Bishop’s Company Repertory Players. Acting had been his ticket to ride; he’d been so scared at his Bishop’s Company audition that he’d recited the stage directions. “I think they hired everybody,” he said. Once he’d taken up residence in Manhattan—“It was wide open,” Shepard said. “You were like a kid in a fun park”—he proceeded to knock around the city, “trying to be an actor, writer, musician, whatever happened.” He had no connections, no money (he sold his blood to buy a cheeseburger), and nothing to fall back on but his lanky, taciturn Western charisma. He did, however, have renegade credentials and a store of arcane knowledge: he had been a 4-H Club member, a sheepshearer, a racecourse hot walker, a herdsman, an orange picker, and a junior-college student.
Shepard was homespun and handsome, with a strong jaw and a dimpled chin. He exuded the mystery and swagger of a movie star, which he would eventually become. (In addition to writing four dozen or so plays—the latest of which, “Ages of the Moon,” opened last week, at the Atlantic Theatre Company—Shepard, who is now sixty-six, has appeared in some forty films; he was nominated for an Oscar for his performance as the test pilot Chuck Yeager, in “The Right Stuff.”) But even as a new arrival in the city he seemed instinctively to understand the importance of image. “Use yer eyes like a weapon. Not defensive. Offensive,” a character in his play “The Tooth of Crime” (1972) says, adding, “You can paralyze a mark with a good set of eyes.” Shepard had such a pair. His almond-shaped blue eyes looked out at the world with wry detachment; they imposed on his passionate nature a mask of cool. His smile was tight-lipped—half knowing, half strategic (it hid a mouthful of craggy teeth). Years of living with invasive family aggression—“The male influences around me were primarily alcoholics and extremely violent,” he said—had taught Shepard to play things close to his chest: to look and to listen. “I listened like an animal. My listening was afraid,” Wesley, the son in Shepard’s 1978 play “Curse of the Starving Class,” says, describing his method for coping with his drunken father. Shepard was a man of few words, many of them mumbled. Compelling to look at but hard to read—at once intellectually savvy and emotionally guarded—he exuded the solitude and the vagueness of the American West.
Though Shepard lacked East Coast sophistication—he was poorly read in those days—he brought news of what he called “the whacked out corridors of broken-off America”: its blue highways, its wilderness, its wasteland, its animal kingdom, its haunted lost souls, its violence. “People want a street angel. They want a saint with a cowboy mouth,” a prescient character in one of Shepard’s early one-acts said. Shepard, it turned out, was the answer to those prayers. He got a job busing tables at the Village Gate, and began to write in earnest. “I had a sense that a voice existed that needed expression, that there was a voice that wasn’t being voiced,” he said. “There were so many voices that I didn’t know where to start. I felt kind of like a weird stenographer. . . . There were definitely things there, and I was just putting them down. I was fascinated by how they structured themselves.” Ralph Cook, the Village Gate’s headwaiter, who was a former bit-part actor in Hollywood Westerns and a fellow-Californian, provided him an entry into the downtown scene through a new space he was starting on the Bowery—Theatre Genesis—where Shepard made his playwriting début, in 1964. By the following year, the twenty-two-year-old Samuel Shepard Rogers VII, who was known as Steve to his family and friends, had reinvented himself as Sam Shepard, whom the Times described as “the generally acknowledged ‘genius’ ” of the Off-Off-Broadway circuit.
Shepard’s early plays, written between 1964 and 1971, were full of surprises and assaults on the senses—people spoke from bathtubs or painted one another, colored Ping-Pong balls dropped from the ceiling, a chicken was sacrificed onstage. The plays express what Shepard called the “despair and hope” of the sixties; they act out both the spiritual dislocation and the protean survival instinct of traumatic times. Better than anyone else writing in that fractious hubbub, Shepard defined the fault lines between youth culture and the mainstream. “You were so close to the people who were going to the plays, there was really no difference between you and them,” he said, pinpointing both his work’s value and its limitation. The mockery, the role-playing, the apocalyptic fears, the hunger for new mythologies, and the physical transformations in his work gave shape to the spiritual strangulation of the decade—which, in Shepard’s words, “sucked dogs.” “For me, there was nothing fun about the sixties,” he said. “Terrible suffering. . . . Things coming apart at the seams.”
In their verbal and visual daring, Shepard’s early plays aspired to match the anarchic wallop of rock and roll. He had been playing drums since the age of twelve, when his father, a semi-professional Dixieland drummer, bought him a secondhand set and taught him how to play. (He continued drumming into his adulthood, with such bands as the Holy Modal Rounders and T Bone Burnett’s Void.) In his writing, he gravitated toward rock’s maverick energy; he listed Little Richard among his literary influences, along with Jackson Pollock and Cajun fiddles. (Later, he befriended Keith Richard, lived briefly with Patti Smith—“He was a renegade with nasty habits / he was a screech owl / he was a man playing cowboys,” she wrote of him—chronicled Bob Dylan’s Rolling Thunder Revue, and co-wrote, with Dylan, the eleven-minute song “Brownsville Girl.”) In plays as varied as “The Tooth of Crime,” “Forensic & the Navigators” (1967), and “Operation Sidewinder” (1970), music and song are a crucial part of Shepard’s dramatic attack. Of these plays, “The Tooth of Crime,” which involves a style war between an old rock king, Hoss, and his upstart challenger, Crow, is the most visionary work. Here Shepard carried the language of drugs, rock, and political struggle from the street to the stage:
Crow: So ya’ wanna be a rocker. Study the moves. Jerry Lee Lewis. Buy some blue suede shoes. Move yer head like Rod Stewart. Put yer ass in a grind. Talkin’ sock it to it, get the image in line. Get the image in line boy. The fantasy rhyme. It’s all over the streets and you can’t buy the time. You can’t buy the bebop. You can’t buy the slide. Got the fantasy blues and no place to hide.
Rhythm led Shepard to character. “When you write a play, you work out like a musician on a piece of music,” he wrote. “You find all the rhythms and the melody and the harmonies and take them as they come.” His early plays, which he refers to now as “cavorting,” were riffs, written at speed—wild, energized, and slipshod—following the rhythmic strategy of his drumming. “Break it all down in pairs. Make the pairs work together, with each other. Then make ’em work against each other, independent,” he wrote in his 1969 play “The Holy Ghostly.” His pieces were abstract flights of illuminated feeling, like the work of the jazz greats—Thelonious Monk, Dizzy Gillespie, Gerry Mulligan, Nina Simone—he heard at the Village Gate, more vectors of energy than maps of psychology. “I preferred a character that was constantly unidentifiable,” Shepard said. As he explained in his note to the actors in “Angel City” (1976), instead of embodying a “whole character” the actor should consider his performance “a fractured whole with bits and pieces of character flying off the central theme,” and aim “to make a kind of music or painting in space without having to feel the need to completely answer intellectually for the character’s behavior.” In those years, by his own admission, Shepard was “dead set against revisions because I couldn’t stand rewriting.” For him and for his downtown audience, the plays were exercises in spontaneity and emotional discovery. “They were chants, they were incantations, they were spells,” he said in “Stalking Himself,” a 1998 PBS documentary. “You get on them and you go.”
Shepard’s talent soon attracted a wide range of interest; he found himself collaborating on movies with Robert Frank and Michelangelo Antonioni, and on theatre pieces with Joseph Chaikin’s experimental Open Theatre. Despite his disdain for the uptown theatre scene, his increasingly ambitious plays required larger casts, bigger budgets, better production values, and greater narrative finesse than his downtown habitat encouraged. “As far as I’m concerned, Broadway just does not exist,” Shepard told Playboy in 1970. Nonetheless, the same year, in a move that in Off-Off Broadway circles was the equivalent of Dylan going electric, Shepard transitioned above Fourteenth Street to Lincoln Center, with “Operation Sidewinder,” a picaresque apocalyptic fable about political oppression, told in a cool pop style, which required, among other things, a seven-foot snake, the performance of a Hopi ritual, a ’57 Chevy, and a rock band. “I am whipped, I am chained. I am prisoner to all your oppression. I am depressed, deranged, decapitated, dehumanized, defoliated, demented and damned! I can’t get out,” the play’s hero says, using the snake as a tourniquet to shoot up. (Shepard himself was no stranger to heroin in those years.)
As the literary manager of Lincoln Center at the time, I was responsible for bringing Shepard uptown. The year before, he had married O-Lan Johnson, an actress who had appeared in “Forensic & the Navigators.” When the two of them came to Lincoln Center for the first preview, the bartender tried to shoo us all out of the lobby because we looked too scruffy. As I noted in my diary, communication between cultures soon turned into a collision:
The show goes well for the first act. At the intermission Sam is nervous, obviously disgruntled. “Don’t you think it’s too smooth?” Talking about the audience he says, “I’m not worried about the old people, I’m worried about the young ones.” . . .
At the theatre—Sam looking gloomy before the show, goes to the bar and sneaks a beer in under his shirt. The audience is tough. They laugh at the Hopi dance scene. . . . On the way out, one girl said, “Do you think he’s serious?”
Afterward, I was shown responses from the bewildered Lincoln Center subscription audience: “Terrible, terrible, terrible,” “The artistic director and anyone connected should be fired.” The play was better received by the critics, who dubbed it “possibly significant” (the Times) and “the wildest and most ambitious show yet at Lincoln Center” (NBC). But, not long afterward, to get off the Village streets and off drugs, Shepard moved to London with his wife and their young son, Jesse Mojo. From leafy Hampstead, he raced greyhounds, wrote plays, and took stock of the homeland from which he felt alienated. “I wanted to get out of the insanity,” he told Matthew Roudané, in his interview “Shepard on Shepard.” “Of course I was also running away from myself!”
After returning to the United States, in 1974, however, Shepard made facing himself and his emotional inheritance the central project of his adulthood. The quartet of major plays that he produced between 1978 and 1985—“Curse of the Starving Class,” the Pulitzer Prizewinning “Buried Child” (1978), “True West” (1980), and “A Lie of the Mind” (1985)—are not traditional psychological dramas. “Plays have to go beyond just ‘working out problems,’ ” he said. They are quasi-naturalistic meditations, in keeping with his plan to move “from colloquial territory” to “poetic country.” But they drew on the deepest recesses of Shepard’s emotional memory.
“Seven Plays,” the collection in which three of the four plays appear, is dedicated “For my father, Sam,” to whom Shepard owed a large part of his identity, his damage, and his subject matter. “Sometimes in someone’s gestures you can notice how a parent is somehow inhabiting that person without there being any awareness of that,” Shepard told Rolling Stone. “Sometimes you can look at your hand and see your father.” Shepard could see Sam Rogers in his own fierce eyes, his infatuation with solitude, his bouts of alcoholism, his ornery single-mindedness, his short fuse, and, especially, his reckless Western machismo. “I’ve been involved in many dangerous foolish things,” Shepard said in “Stalking Himself.” “I’ve been upside down under falling horses at a full gallop. I’ve been fired upon by a 12-gauge Ithaca Over-and-Under. I’ve rolled in a 1949 Plymouth coupe.” Shepard sees himself as a “victim” of his father’s tough-guy persona. “My old man tried to force on me a notion of what it was to be a ‘man,’ ” he said. “And it destroyed my dad.”
“She’s taking a lot of affection pressure off you.”
As a child, amid the violence of his family, Shepard, who has spoken of “tremendous morning despair,” was something of a sleepwalker. He grew up feeling as if he were living “on Mars”; “I feel like I’ve never had a home,” he said. “Sometimes I just stand outside and watch my family moving around inside the house,” he wrote in his 1982 memoir, “Motel Chronicles.” “I stand there a long time sometimes. They don’t know that I watch them.” Playwriting called those indigestible family experiences out of him. Shepard’s dramatic world is peopled with derelict, disappointed somnambulists: Tilden, the “burned out and displaced” son in “Buried Child,” who returns to his family after a twenty-year exile in Mexico; Weston, the quixotic drunken father in “Curse of the Starving Class”; Lee, the feral thief, who wanders out of the desert in “True West.” Taken together, these unmoored souls form a kind of tribe of the living dead, deracinated men trying to escape a sense of shame that they only vaguely understand. They recede from family, from society, and, through drink, from themselves. All these figures are fragments of Shepard’s father, a Second World War bomber pilot and high-school teacher, who moved the family (Shepard has two younger sisters, Roxanne, an actress, and Sandy, a singer-songwriter, who composed the songs for Robert Altman’s film version of Shepard’s 1983 play “Fool for Love”) from Illinois, where Shepard was born, to an avocado ranch in Duarte, California, and who spent his last years alone in the desert because he didn’t “fit with people.”
“My dad had a lot of bad luck,” Shepard said in Don Shewey’s 1985 biography “Sam Shepard.” “You could see his suffering, his terrible suffering, living a life that was disappointing and looking for another one.” Sam Rogers’s family history is retold in detail by Pop, the main character in “The Holy Ghostly.” “Me, I never got no real breaks,” Pop begins. “My old man was a dairy farmer. Started hittin’ the bottle and lost the whole farm. Things started goin’ down hill from that point on.” Shepard attributes part of his father’s downfall to postwar trauma. “My dad came from an extremely rural farm community . . . and the next thing he knows he’s flying B-24s over the South Pacific, over Romania, dropping bombs and killing people he couldn’t even see,” he said. “These men returned from this heroic victory . . . and were devastated in some basic way . . . that’s mysterious still. . . . The medicine was booze.” The booze often led to abuse. “Those Midwestern women of the forties suffered an incredible psychological assault,” Shepard recalled. “While growing up, I saw that assault over and over again, and not only in my own family.” In 1984, Rogers was hit by a car, after a drunken quarrel with a girlfriend in a New Mexico bar. “You either die like a dog or you die like a man. And if you die like a dog you just go back to dust,” Shepard, who had his father cremated, said later. After the ceremony, Shepard picked up the leather container holding the ashes. “It was so heavy,” he said. “You wouldn’t think the ashes of a man would be so heavy.”
“Let’s leave the old man out of it,” Austin, the successful screenwriter in “True West,” says to his brother, Lee, of their father, who lives in abject isolation in the desert. But, for Shepard and for his characters, there is no escaping the father. “He put stuff into me that’ll never go away,” a character complains of her father in “A Lie of the Mind.” (A New Group production of this play, directed by Ethan Hawke, will open in February.) Likewise, Wesley, in “Starving Class,” describes his father’s psychic imperialism: “Part of him was growing on me. I could feel him taking over me. I could feel myself retreating.” Shepard’s legion of feral male characters keeps alive aspects of the toxic Sam Rogers. “He was a . . . maniac, but in a quiet way,” Shepard said.
Shepard’s early success made him an object of envy to his floundering father; it also made his father an object of guilt to him. In “The Holy Ghostly,” Pop’s childish demands for allegiance from his son (who has changed his name to Ice) come with a jealous attack on his achievements. “Don’t go givin’ me none a’ yer high falootin’ esoteric gobbledy gook, Buster Brown,” Pop says. “Just ’cause ya’ struck off fer the big city on yer own and made a big splash . . . don’t mean ya’ can humiliate an old man.” From the stage, Shepard broadcast his fierce refusal to regret his decisions. “For eighteen years I was your slave,” Ice says. “I worked for you hand and foot. Shearing the sheep, irrigating the trees, listening to your bullshit about ‘improve your mind, you’ll never get ahead, learn how to lose, hard work and guts and never say die,’ and now I suppose you want me to bring you back to life. You pathetic creep. Hire yourself a professional mourner, Jim. I’m splitting.” In the third act of “The Late Henry Moss” (2000), a dead father comes back from the grave to berate his son, Earl, for not having saved him from a squalid exile and from his self-destructiveness:
Henry: You coulda stopped me but you didn’t.
Earl: I couldn’t. I—I—I—was scared. I was—just—too—scared.
Henry: You were scared! A what? A me? You were scared of a dead man?
Shepard’s quartet of family plays is an act of both reunion and resolution. “I’m not doing this in order to vent demons,” he said. “I want to shake hands with them.” The subject called out of him an unprecedented degree of urgency and eloquence. A wife brain-damaged by her husband’s jealous violence (“A Lie of the Mind”); the corpse of a murdered child exhumed (“Buried Child”); a mother’s home trashed by her sons (“True West”); warring parents trying to sell the family home out from under each other (“Starving Class”)—the plays are allegories of mutilated love, bearing superb witness to Shepard’s violent memories. Told in a more textured, complex narrative style than his early work—Shepard’s association with Joseph Chaikin had taught him the virtues of rewriting—the plays resound with bewilderment at the absence of familial normality: “What’s happened to this family?” (“Buried Child”), “What kind of family is this?” (“Starving Class”). The refrigerator in “Starving Class”—it’s either empty or stuffed with inappropriate food by the boozy Weston—becomes a symbol of the fiasco of nurture. “You couldn’t be all that starving!” Weston bellows. “We’re not that bad off, goddamnit!”
The impoverishment is psychological, the crime pathological carelessness. In “True West,” the mother returns home to find her sons strangling each other and her house torn apart. Coolly surveying the mess, she says to one son, “You’re not killing him, are you?” before decamping to a motel. In “Starving Class,” Weston breaks down the kitchen door; his wife, Ella, boils the chicken that her daughter has painstakingly raised for a 4-H demonstration; and the son, Wesley, urinates on his sister’s presentation. Love is unavailable; hatred is the only form of intimacy. The perversity of family combat is brought together in a brilliant final image, as mother and son try to recall Weston’s story of an eagle that carried off a cat in its talons:
Ella: That cat’s tearing his chest out, and the eagle’s trying to drop him, but the cat won’t let go because he know if he falls he’ll die.
Wesley: And the eagle’s being torn apart in midair. . . .
Ella: And they come crashing down to the earth. Both of them come crashing down. Like one whole thing.
Like planets in their own orbits, Shepard’s family members revolve around one another without ever intersecting. In “Starving Class,” Weston remarks on the circle of solitude that his father inhabited. “He lived apart,” he says. “Right in the midst of things and he lived apart.” In “Buried Child,” the atmosphere of disconnection is remarked upon by a young visitor, who has “the feeling that nobody lives here but me. . . . You’re here but it doesn’t seem like you’re supposed to be.” (“What a bunch of bullshit this is!” Sam Rogers said, drunk and disorderly at the Greer Garson Theatre in New Mexico, where he saw the play. “The ushers tried to throw him out,” Shepard told The Paris Review. “He resisted, and in the end they allowed him to stay because he was the father of the playwright.”)
Shepard’s characters are not so much warped as unborn; clueless and rudderless, they can’t find their way. In “Starving Class,” Weston explains to his son that he is unable to navigate his own life: “I couldn’t figure out the jumps. From being born, to growing up, to droppin’ bombs, to having kids, to hittin’ bars, to this. It all turned on me somehow.” Like so many of Shepard’s derailed men, Weston has killed off his empathetic, female side. In the finale of “True West,” the brothers, sensitive writer and reckless thief, square off against each other, the two sides of Shepard’s own divided personality. “You know in yourself that the female part of oneself as a man is, for the most part, battered and beaten up and kicked to shit just like some women in relationships,” Shepard said. In “A Lie of the Mind,” Jake, who has beaten his wife so badly that he thinks he’s killed her, says that it’s “like my whole life is lost from losing her. Gone. That I’ll die like this. Lost.” When he does finally make contact with his brain-damaged wife, he kisses her, then surrenders her to the affections of his gentler other self—his brother, Frankie.
Taken together, these four plays constitute a sort of empire of the damned, whose inhabitants are caught in desperate but impossible retreat from their legacy of self-destruction. “It always comes. Repeats itself. . . . Even when you try to change it,” Ella says, in “Starving Class.” “It goes back and back to tiny little cells and genes. . . . We inherit it and pass it down, and then pass it down again.” “Character is something that can’t be helped,” Shepard said. “It’s like destiny. . . . It can be covered up, it can be messed with, it can be screwed around with, but it can’t be ultimately changed. It’s like the structure of our bones, and the blood that runs through our veins.” His characters are doomed by their unconscious, which they can’t or won’t examine. In fact, they’ll do anything for an unexamined life.
“Theatre is a place to bring stuff from your life experience,” Shepard said in the PBS documentary. “You send this telegram, and then you get out.” Since his career as a screen actor took off, in the eighties, he has written fewer plays, and the results have been uneven. “I’ve never been able to write a play while I’ve been acting in a film,” he told Rolling Stone. “You get enraptured for a long time . . . and it’s difficult to do that in an actor’s trailer.” The message inside the bright comic envelope of Shepard’s new play, “Ages of the Moon,” is one of heartbreak.
In recent years, Shepard has had some rocky moments with the actress Jessica Lange, his partner since 1983 (they met while co-starring in the 1982 movie “Frances”), with whom he has two children. In “Fool for Love,” Shepard examined the turmoil of his exit from his fifteen-year marriage to Johnson. In his last play, “Kicking a Dead Horse” (2007), a Beckett-influenced monologue, the narrator, Hobart Struther, standing in the desert beside his dead horse, delivers a litany of his losses: his horse, his youth, his authenticity, and, perhaps imminently, his wife:
She was amazing to me. She was.
Was?
Is. Still. But then—
In the past?
Yes. In the past. She was beyond belief. I thought I’d died and gone to heaven.
In “Ages of the Moon,” that loss has been accomplished. Ernest Tubb’s “Have You Ever Been Lonely” plays as the show begins; after the lines “How can I go on living / Now that we’re apart,” the lights come up on two codgers drinking on the porch of a Kentucky-style brick country house. “Here’s the really sour part of the whole deal,” Ames (the expert Stephen Rea), who cuts a comic figure in suspenders, short khaki work pants, and black-and-white wingtips with no socks, says in the play’s first line. “She discovers this note—this note from this girl, which to this day I cannot for the life of me remember. . . . I swear, some girl I would never in a million years have ever returned to for even a minor blow-job.” Byron (Seán McGinley), his old friend, who has come to console Ames for the breakup of his marriage, replies, “Minor?”
Under the direction of Jimmy Fay, “Ages of the Moon” has the loose banter and percussive rhythms of Shepard’s early plays—it even has an eleven-o’clock “aria”—but the evening has more splash than sizzle; nonetheless, since Shepard is a cunning craftsman, the play’s charm is insinuating. Ames and Byron are intended as clowns of inconsolability, a kind of country-and-Western Vladimir and Estragon. They drink; they argue; they fight; they pass the time from midday to midnight waiting for an eclipse of the moon. Twice during the evening, Byron calls Ames “hopeless”; the word evokes his marriage. “I can’t ever go back now,” Ames says. “I know. I can see it. The writing’s on the wall.”
The play is slight; the weight of its sorrow is not. Shepard leaves his characters gazing poignantly into the gloaming. “Sliver of moonlight fades to black,” the stage direction reads. As Ernest Tubb’s bright voice sings them into shadow—“When you look at me with those stars in your eyes / I could waltz across Texas with you”—the men sit, drinks in hand, staring into space. The falling darkness plays as the declivity of Shepard’s life and love. “I hate endings,” he once said. “Just detest them. Beginnings are definitely the most exciting, middles are perplexing, and endings are a disaster.” ♦
John Lahr has been the senior drama critic for The New Yorker since 1992.Read more »
More:ActorsFathersMoviesNew York CityPlaywrightsSam Shepard

Sign up for our daily newsletter: the best of The New Yorker every day.

Enter your e-mail
Go

Most Popular

1.
News Desk
The Uncomfortable Truth About Affirmative Action and Asian-Americans
By Jeannie Suk Gersen
2.
Photo Booth
What Rampant Materialism Looks Like, and What It Costs
By Rebecca Mead
3.
News Desk
Why Is Donald Trump Still So Horribly Witless about the World?
By Robin Wright
4.
A Reporter at Large
The Intelligent Plant
By Michael Pollan
5.
Elements
How Silicon Valley’s Workplace Culture Produced James Damore’s Google Memo
By Anna Wiener
Our Thirty Most Popular

Recommended Stories

The Theatre
Sam Shepard’s “Fool for Love”
Sam Shepard’s “Fool for Love.”

By Hilton Als
Culture Desk
Postscript: Sam Shepard, Who Brought Rage and Rebellion Onstage, Dies at Seventy-Three
He was always hip, always ahead of his time. His work charted the confusions and illuminated the longing of a generation.

By John LahrJul. 31, 2017
Ingénue
Cycling
By Lizzie Widdicombe
A Critic at Large
Lucky Man
Horton Foote’s three acts.

By John Lahr

Listen to the New Yorker Radio HourBuy the CoverPlay the Jigsaw Puzzle
News & Politics
Daily Comment
John Cassidy
Amy Davidson
Ryan Lizza
Benjamin Wallace-Wells
Culture
Cultural Comment
Culture Desk
Goings On About Town
The Critics
Jia Tolentino
Persons of Interest
Business, Science & Tech
Currency
Elements
Maria Konnikova
Humor
Daily Shouts
Shouts & Murmurs
The Borowitz Report
Cartoons
Daily Cartoon
Cartoon Caption Contest
Cartoon Bank
Books & Fiction
Page-Turner
Books
Literary Lives
Poems
Fiction
Magazine
This Week's Issue
Archive
Subscribe
Photography
Photo Booth
Portfolio
Video
Culture
Humor
Politics
Business
Science & Tech
Books
Sports
Podcasts
The New Yorker Radio Hour
Political Scene
The Writer's Voice
Fiction
Poetry
Out Loud
More
Customer Care
Buy the Cover
Apps
Jigsaw Puzzle
SecureDrop
Store
RSS
Site Map
Newsletters
The Daily
Culture Review
Podcasts
Cartoons
John Cassidy
The Borowitz Report
Fiction
Goings On About Town
About Us
About
Careers
Contact
FAQ
Media Kit
Press
Follow Us

© 2017 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our user agreement (effective 1/2/2016) and privacy policy (effective 1/2/2016). Your California privacy rights. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with prior written permission of Condé Nast. The New Yorker may earn a portion of sales from products and services that are purchased through links on our site as part of our affiliate partnerships with retailers.
Texas Monthly – Featured
MENU

THEDRUG RUNNERS
PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAVID RAMOS
The Tarahumara of northern Mexico became famous for their ability to run incredibly long distances. In recent years, cartels have exploited their talents by forcing them to ferry drugs into the U.S. Now, with their land ravaged by violence, they’re running for their lives.

JULY 2017
| by RYAN GOLDBERG

Photographs by David Ramos
IT WAS A HALF hour after midnight and Silvino Cubesare Quimare was approaching the ghost town of Separ, in southwest New Mexico. Tall and lithe, his skin browned from years of laboring under the desert sun, he strode through the darkness. Strapped to his back were two homespun burlap packs, one filled with 45 pounds of marijuana bricks and the other with enough burritos and gallon jugs of water to survive another week in the wilderness. With him were five cousins and a nephew, each shouldering a similar load. They trudged silently past the scars of an old copper mining trail, long-gone railroad tracks and trading posts that once upon a time exchanged men, minerals, and equipment across the border to Chihuahua. Up ahead, they saw the lights of a highway and knew they were within a dozen miles of their drop-off. They’d reach it before daybreak.

It was April 2, 2010, and over five days they had traveled roughly five hundred miles from their village of Huisuchi, in the remote Sierra Madre mountains of northern Mexico. For months, Huisuchi had been cursed with drought. Though clouds had gathered off and on over the villagers’ homes—dark, billowing masses that overshadowed their huts among the fields of corn—it had not rained. The villagers had danced, and their children had tossed handfuls of water toward the sky, asking their god Onorúame for help, but relief had not come. By early spring their corn was burned on the stalk. Rather than face starvation, Silvino’s cousins had approached him with an idea: they could go on a drug-running mission across the border. It was a quick-paying job, and it would help their village. “You’re strong and you know the way,” they pleaded. “You’ve done this before.”

Silvino, a farmer with four children, knew the canyons the way urban dwellers know city streets: every rock, cactus, and river bend was a sign.
In fact, Silvino had carried a mochila, as the narcos called it, three times before. The reasons for this were, in some ways, fated. His people, an indigenous tribe of roughly 70,000 known as the Tarahumara, had originated on the lush plains east of the mountains. But beginning in the sixteenth century the tribe fled Spanish invaders, Jesuit missionaries, and Mexican settlers—and their fatal diseases, forced labor, and attempted conversions—retreating into the Sierra Madre’s forbidding landscape. They settled what would come to be known as the Sierra Tarahumara, an expansive network of canyons that are, at some points, deeper than the Grand Canyon, dropping 6,140 feet through three ecosystems. The most famous section, covered with lichen, is the color of oxidized copper. When the Norwegian explorer Carl Lumholtz stopped at the edge of one of these canyons, Urique, in the late nineteenth century, he couldn’t imagine anyone living below. In his book on his travels through the Sierra Madre mountains, Unknown Mexico, he recounts that when the Jesuits first arrived and asked the Tarahumara about the canyon’s depth, they replied, “Only the birds know.”

For centuries the Tarahumara got by as subsistence farmers. Their huts clung to the granite slopes and crevices of the canyons, which are connected by a vast system of narrow footpaths. In these rugged gorges, they developed a unique running style that eventually brought them fame. Either barefoot or in sandals (called huaraches) made from old tire treads and goat hide, they were able to traverse seemingly super-human distances. “Tarahumara” is a Spanish corruption of the tribe’s name, Rarámuri, meaning “ones with light feet” or “foot runners.”


Maria Juana Ramirez at the Cerocahui ultramarathon (37 miles) in Urique Canyon in October 2016.
Traditionally they ran as a form of religious ritual, such as to celebrate the harvest, in two-team races called rarajipari. For up to 24 hours—and sometimes longer—they kicked a small wooden ball across a rocky trail, and by the end of the race, teams often had only a few men left standing. But besides stamina, rarajipari demanded selflessness and strategy. In the days leading up to the race, competitors ground corn for an energy drink called pinole (and set aside a fermented version as their post-race celebratory beer, tesgüino). The afternoon before, the two teams walked the course, quarreling over its design and the number of laps. During the race, the slower runners tended to set the early pace, while the closers bided their time. Spectators wagered clothes, goats, or money on the outcome and lit the way at night with pine-resin torches.

The tribe’s runners had never ventured far from home and remained largely unknown until 1993, when an opportunistic American photographer named Rick Fisher brought several members, including a 55-year-old grandfather and a 40-something goat farmer, to an old Colorado mining town called Leadville to enter its 100-mile ultramarathon. The race was part of the budding sport of extreme long-distance trail running, in which race lengths range from slightly longer than the standard 26.2-mile marathon to more than 150 miles. Wearing sandals and swigging beers at the final aid station before the finish, the Tarahumara runners captured first, second, and fifth place and left behind hundreds of mesmerized competitors and fans.

Fisher struck deals with sponsors; he paid his runners with bags of corn and beans. When he returned with seven new competitors in 1994, they dominated the race again. The American ultramarathoner Micah True got to know some of the Tarahumara runners in Leadville, and he was so changed by the experience that he later moved to the Sierra Madre. But by the time he arrived, what he found was troubling: because of years of drought, famine, and encroaching cartel violence, in some areas the tribe’s running traditions were almost entirely dormant. Meanwhile, as ultramarathons surged in popularity, American runners began crushing previously held records. True wondered how they would fare against the Tarahumara, and he sought to revitalize these local traditions. In 2006, he persuaded Scott Jurek, the top American, to travel to Urique Canyon for a trail race he was organizing that is now known as the Ultra Caballo Blanco. He enticed locals to enter by promising food vouchers to anyone who finished. He also enlisted the two best Tarahumara runners: Silvino, who was 28 at the time, and his younger cousin Arnulfo Quimare Qui.

Silvino, a farmer with four children, knew the canyons the way urban dwellers know city streets: every rock, cactus, and river bend was a sign. He’d run rarajipari as a boy, and, per Tarahumara tradition, gambled on the race from an early age, winning soap, pens, and sometimes even a chicken. Running was in his blood. His mother had been a running champion in her day, and one of her sisters was the mother of Arnulfo, his greatest competitor. At the Caballo Blanco, both Silvino and Arnulfo proved themselves, and though Jurek passed Silvino near the end of the 47 miles, he couldn’t catch Arnulfo.

The journalist Christopher McDougall chronicled the race, and his ensuing book—Born to Run: A Hidden Tribe, Superathletes, and the Greatest Race the World Has Never Seen—became an international sensation, igniting a global running craze. He attributed part of the Tarahumara’s success to their minimal footwear; they ran with a lightness unfamiliar to American runners, landing on the midpoint of their foot instead of the heel. International runners and film crews descended on the Sierra Tarahumara. Multinational corporations seized the merchandising opportunities, and soon, people all over the world were wearing barefoot-style shoes. It seemed that everyone profited except the Tarahumara.

Mexican cartels, meanwhile, recognized an opportunity for a different sort of international commerce. Though the Tarahumara largely kept to themselves, poverty and hunger made them targets for narcos looking for mules willing to make the demanding trek to designated drug drop-off points in New Mexico, Arizona, and Texas. Cartel recruiters trolled the gas stations and plazas of small Mexican towns. They bought blue jeans for those wearing traditional loincloths and paired them with guides to lead them to the border at night. In the Tarahumara, the cartels found literal drug runners, who not only could cover incredible distances but were desperate enough to do it.


Silvino Cubesare Quimare in the fields near the town of Urique.
Silvino, with his farmland afflicted by unrelenting drought, was one of the desperate ones, so he signed on to tote drugs. Still, he got paid only if he successfully completed his mission. His first time, in 2005, he did just that, tossing his mochila into the back of a truck on a highway near El Paso. The second time, he completed his drop at a fancy hotel outside Las Cruces, New Mexico. The third time, though, in February 2007, Border Patrol agents found him and two others hiding in creosote bushes one hundred miles west of Las Cruces, with three backpacks that totaled 194 pounds. He was arrested and sentenced to eight months. And so when Micah True hosted the second Caballo Blanco, Silvino couldn’t make the race; he was sitting in a New Mexico prison.

After his release, it took Silvino two months to get home. Immigrations and Customs Enforcement agents left him in Juárez without enough money for a bus ticket home. He found a friend to front him enough to get to Janos, the first town on his route back. Once there, he picked chiles to earn the bus fare farther south to Chihuahua City, where he finally cobbled together the fare to Huisuchi by making cheese at a quesería.

Silvino swore he would never run drugs again, but by 2010, there was still not enough food to eat. His wife, Hilda, begged him not to go, but he felt he had no choice. He and his cousins would be paid 15,000 pesos ($825) apiece. In one week, he could make what usually took three months of labor in the Sierra—and there was little work. “A mí me vale,” Silvino told his wife. I think it’s worth it.

Now here he was, with six members of his own family—nearly a year after Born to Run had become an international best seller—striding through the dark up the boot heel of New Mexico. During the day, they slept beneath frayed creosote bushes, concealing their bags nearby, and at night they trudged north toward the freeway, avoiding rattlesnakes, coyotes, and most of all, la migra, the Border Patrol. They were close now, a few hours from their destination.

Then, all at once, they saw the spotlights. The Border Patrol had found them. Silvino flung his bags into the sand and began to run. Not again, he thought. He feared what might happen to his family if he went back to federal prison. An agent on a dirt bike tore after him as the others scattered. Silvino felt the adrenaline course through him, and he told himself to escape to the mountains they’d crossed on their way north. Amid the tall gray peaks and dry basins, he’d be harder to catch. Looking behind him, Silvino could see his nephew Luis flagging, but he couldn’t wait. He zigzagged around scrawny desert saplings, while the shadows cast by the dirt bike’s spotlight darted around him. He moved swiftly. He was conditioned to navigating switchbacks. Muy ligero, he told himself. Light-footed.

Soon the sound of the dirt bike faded. He had escaped, but Silvino continued running through the night, slept half of the next day, and then ran through the afternoon and the next night. He crossed abandoned desert valleys on old Apache land with nothing to eat, drinking only dung-infested runoff water. Two days later, he reached Ascensión, close to where they’d picked up the drugs. None of his companions had made it out. He had run one hundred miles.

Silvino flung his bags into the sand and began to run. Not again, he thought. He feared what might happen to his family if he went back to federal prison.
Tarahumara-WTexas.jpg PINTO CANYON ROAD, NEAR MARFA, TEXAS. PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN DAVIDSON.
PAUL CHAMBERS WAS sitting in his Alpine office when he got an email about a new client named Sebastian Vega Genoveva waiting for him in jail. It was March 2015, and the 27-year-old, with sandy-brown hair and a neatly cropped beard, was fresh out of law school. Unlike many of his classmates, he didn’t have to wait long for work. Not in West Texas.

Remote and rugged, West Texas, along with much of the southwestern United States, has long been a key drug-smuggling corridor. But in the nineties, as Mexican cartels rose in power relative to their Colombian counterparts—who preferred to traffic through South Florida—West Texas became even more essential. In the past twenty years, there has been a fivefold increase in Border Patrol agents working that stretch of border, up to nearly 20,000. By 2015, the tiny office of the federal public defenders in Alpine was tasked with the second-largest caseload in Texas, behind El Paso. Meanwhile, budget cuts meant the number of lawyers (four) stayed the same. The vast majority of cases were for illegal entry—immigration crimes eclipsed all other federal offenses—but they also saw increased numbers of traffickers. Many of these were caught and processed as so-called backpacker cases: groups of six or more Mexican men arrested in the mountains, each carrying about 45 pounds of marijuana. Unable to afford lawyers, each defendant was assigned one by the court. Federal public defenders were typically appointed the first defendant, and private attorneys, like Chambers, were tasked with the rest.

Scanning his new client’s arrest report, Chambers expected the details to coalesce into the usual pattern, but he noticed an anomaly.
Scanning his new client’s arrest report, Chambers expected the details to coalesce into the usual pattern, but he noticed an anomaly. When Border Patrol agents arrested this group of six and weighed the marijuana bricks—all 256 pounds—they realized that one felt different. Unwrapping it, they discovered a plastic container with a pound of methamphetamine inside. In backpacker cases, each defendant is on the hook for the entire load, not merely his own. Chambers dug out the sentencing guidelines: a scant .11 pounds of meth would double their potential sentences, from five to ten years. He dreaded telling his client.

The next day, he drove two hours with Liz Rogers, a thirty-year former federal defender known for pulling out long-shot victories, to the West Texas Detention Facility, in Sierra Blanca, to see Vega. Rogers, a family friend, was now a private attorney and had also been assigned a member of the group.

When Chambers was still in law school, in 2012, Rogers had helped introduce him to the federal courts that were handling the influx of people and drugs coming across the border. He accompanied her to court as an intern. He’d expected to see one person on trial. Instead, groups of up to two dozen Mexican nationals at a time, arrested for smuggling drugs or illegal entry, were marched in front of the judge throughout the day. Any other way, Chambers learned, and the courthouse would be backed up for years. That summer, he saw around four hundred cases come through the Alpine office, and within a few years its annual caseload had more than doubled. Chambers returned to school with one of Rogers’s mantras ringing in his ears: “procedural due process,” as opposed to actual due process. In one of his ethics courses, he told the class that what they were learning was a fantasy. “Well, that may happen there,” the professor responded, “but that’s not the way it’s supposed to happen.”

When Chambers arrived at the detention facility, the 39-year-old Vega stood up to greet his lawyer. The six-foot-two Chambers towered over him by more than a foot. At first, Vega didn’t seem to understand what Chambers was saying through his translator. Finally, after a few hours, Vega asked the translator if she could speak more slowly. He explained that Spanish was his second language. Vega, it turned out, was a Tarahumara.


Paul Chambers outside his Alpine law office on June 22, 2017. PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN DAVIDSON
Vega and his family had fled the canyons to find work in Chihuahua, and though he got a job as a brickmaker, it barely sustained them. Soon he was recruited to run drugs into Texas. He’d hoped that once there he could stay a short time and work—in the Permian Basin oil fields, perhaps—and then return home with money for his wife and two sons. But on the afternoon of March 6, Border Patrol agents found him and five others sleeping in the brush west of Marfa. After walking for ten days in the harsh borderland, their guide had abandoned them that morning.

As Chambers listened, he was struck by Vega’s guilelessness. Vega readily told him what had happened—as he did to the agents who arrested him, along with all but one in his group—but when Chambers described his offense, Vega couldn’t understand why the charges were so severe. How could he be responsible for all the backpacks when he only carried one? It didn’t make sense, Vega said, and worse, it was unfair.

Competitors from all over the world, electrified by "Born to Run", made the pilgrimage to the Tarahumara homeland. But racing couldn’t alleviate the hardships ravaging the Tarahumara themselves.
Chambers was impressed; none of his other clients had ever commented on the injustice of the law. He called his colleague and friend Jaime Escuder, who had also been assigned a defendant in the case. Escuder had recently defended a Tarahumara man in his fifties who, they realized, had been in Vega’s brickmaking crew. They lived in the same indigent neighborhood on the edge of Chihuahua. Escuder’s client had been sentenced to eighteen months in federal prison—six months longer than others in his group because he’d had the misfortune of appearing before a different judge. Around the same time, federal defenders in Alpine had represented a pair of Tarahumara teenagers also recruited in Chihuahua. While working a job canning chiles, they were told they could earn twice as much at a pecan orchard near the Rio Grande. When they arrived at the orchard, there were no pecans. Investigators from the federal public defender’s office had seen Tarahumara come through their West Texas offices for five years, as had their colleagues in nearby Las Cruces.

Chambers turned to the internet. He read about races that went on for several days and about the ultramarathon that now brought the best long-distance runners to the Sierra Madre. He read about villages that had no electricity or running water and that were full of ex-felons. The news coverage he could find estimated that more than a hundred Tarahumara had been arrested during the previous decade, but unless the defendants had to have a Rarámuri translator, like Escuder’s, their background had probably never come up. The actual number was likely much higher.

When he met Vega again, Chambers jokingly asked, “If you could run like that, why didn’t you escape?” Vega said he never could have evaded the agents in their trucks and helicopters. Chambers nodded. There were some things you couldn’t outrun.

IN MARCH 2010, a month before Silvino’s narrow escape in New Mexico, the annual Ultra Caballo Blanco had drawn a record number of international participants to Urique Canyon. Competitors from all over the world, electrified by Born to Run, made the pilgrimage to the Tarahumara homeland. But racing couldn’t alleviate the hardships ravaging the Tarahumara themselves. That year, many had shown up to the event starving, walking or hitchhiking from hundreds of miles around, bringing only the clothes on their backs. Urique’s head of tourism watched in tears as Tarahumara runners collapsed. Silvino could only muster twenty-fifth place.


Silvino on the cover of Runner’s World Mexico.
A few years earlier, the Sinaloa and Juárez cartels had begun escalating their fight for control of billion-dollar fields of marijuana and poppy in the so-called Golden Triangle, where the states of Chihuahua, Sinaloa, and Durango converge in the Sierra. To meet the surging demand for heroin in the United States, they also began seizing additional farmland in order to increase poppy cultivation. Many Tarahumara were forced to grow these crops, their wages docked and their land stolen. By 2010, entire communities had emptied out of the canyons, and some ten thousand had fled to the city of Chihuahua, where they were more easily conscripted into smuggling. There, it also became common to see Tarahumara children begging or selling candy and key chains on the streets.

For Silvino, new opportunities eventually arose from the attention generated by the book. Organizers across the world sought Tarahumara runners for their races, and those who moved comfortably among chabochi, or outsiders, began receiving regular invitations to race. So, after returning from his aborted drug run, Silvino saw his racing career take off. He finished second in an ultramarathon in Austria, the first of many races in more than half a dozen countries where his expenses were paid and the possible earnings were worth the trip. After successes in Costa Rica and Spain, he landed on the cover of Runner’s World México, in December 2014. He built a small adobe house for his wife and children and another for his parents and siblings, and he fixed up an old truck so he could bring his harvest into the town of Urique to sell. Still, racing never provided a stable income for Silvino—prize money wasn’t guaranteed—and most of the Tarahumara fared far worse.

As the cartel war ricocheted from one canyon to the next, Urique became one of the last towns to be engulfed by intense violence. It had once served as an outpost for tourists exploring the natural beauty of the surrounding canyons, which helped keep it relatively tranquil until a Sinaloa boss’s nephew was murdered there, in late 2014. From then on gunfire could routinely be heard in the town and up the canyon. In the days leading up to the 2015 Ultra Caballo Blanco, an eight-hour battle erupted in a village along the planned racecourse. International runners arrived to find armed gangs in the streets of Urique, while local government officials assured the competitors there were no problems. A day before the race, however, Juárez hit men stormed the police station, seizing two officers and a teenager, and American organizers called off the race. Most of the visiting runners, who had come from 23 countries, made their way out under military escort. More than five hundred Tarahumara, Silvino included, resolved to carry on anyway, and the mayor agreed to a version that cut out the downriver loop, where the major shoot-out had occurred.

A few months later, Sinaloa won control of the area—nearly a dozen planes flew out of the town of Urique in one day with the remaining Juárez fighters—but conditions worsened. With the Sinaloa in command, land theft and poppy growing increased.

Some Tarahumara activists tried to make their plight known, like Irma Chávez Cruz, a 25-year-old mother who was a friend of Silvino’s. Chávez had learned Spanish as a teenager, to serve as an interpreter for her people, then earned a university degree in ecology and gotten elected to local government. She worried about Tarahumara children losing their running traditions, so she regularly put on races in the region, including all-female events called ariweta. She helped organize the largest-ever recorded rarajipari in Chihuahua—Silvino led one of the teams—and together they traveled to Brazil, in October 2015, for the inaugural World Indigenous Games. The next year, Chávez ran in the Boston Marathon (possibly the first Tarahumara woman to do so) and, while there, spoke on a panel about indigenous running traditions. Together with her father, an activist, musician, and poet known as Makawi, she pleaded for government officials in Chihuahua to help prevent drug traffickers from stealing their land and their water. But help never came, and speaking out became risky. According to the Mexico City–based magazine Proceso, at least five indigenous activists were assassinated in 2015 and 2016.

In the summer of 2016, drug traffickers moved on the town of Basihuare, near Chávez’s hometown of Rejogochi, stealing the funds from the town’s ejido, a government-supported agriculture cooperative. After razing the corn and bean fields, they planted poppies instead.


Mickey Mahaffey, a 64-year-old American, has lived among the Tarahumara for two decades. Last summer, he hired Silvino to help manage a chia cultivation project.
That same summer, Silvino landed a job as a manager for a chia cultivation project for 400 pesos (about $20) a day. A fine salary, but it was an experimental crop: a 64-year-old American named Mickey Mahaffey, who had lived among the Tarahumara for two decades and married Silvino’s younger sister, Carmen, struck up a deal to grow eight acres for an energy-bar company based in Richmond, Virginia. Even for a strong farmer like Silvino, who used oxen to plough his fields in Huisuchi, cultivating chia in Urique proved biblical in its afflictions. In the middle of August, Silvino and seven others cleared eight acres of weeds by hand amid a plague of red ants, tarantulas, bees, gnats, flies, scorpions, snakes, floods, and 125-degree heat. It doubled as his race training.

Silvino couldn’t compete in the U.S. because of his arrest record, but he still needed to race to remain financially free of the cartels, so he often stuck to races closer to home, like the upcoming ultramarathon in Cerocahui, which included a four-thousand-foot ascent up a road out of Urique. Two runners in their mid-twenties were planning to challenge him, and the prize for winning was significant: 14,000 pesos ($765), which, coincidentally, was nearly the going rate for running drugs across the border.

IF CIRCUMSTANCES ONCE again drove Silvino to carry another drug load, he’d be risking a potentially lengthy prison term. Chambers had seen many of these harsh sentences handed out, including to drug runners who were essentially forced into smuggling. Still, of the dozens and dozens of clients he’d defended, it was Vega, and the plight of the Tarahumara, that stuck with him.

Chambers grew up on the border. His late paternal grandfather, Boyd, was a rancher on the Sierra Vieja, a small mountain range that locals call the Candelaria Rimrock, after the nearest town. Roughly forty miles northwest of Big Bend Ranch State Park, it is a place of extremes, a dry, barren land that is only ever hot or cold. It’s untamable, though his family certainly tried. Like the Tarahumara, the Chambers clan was inexorably tied to their land.

Growing up, his love for the ranch—bouncing over Capote Creek in his grandfather’s truck, watching the men ride out with the cattle while mounted on his own pony—was matched by his admiration for the tough people who worked it. Chambers remembers his grandfather watching the Weather Channel regularly, hoping for rain. To help keep them on the ranch, his grandmother Johnnie earned a teaching degree from Sul Ross State University in her forties, and she ran the two-room schoolhouse in Candelaria for 25 years. His grandfather served as a Presidio County commissioner and was often asked to resolve border disputes privately. Back then, nationality didn’t matter as much; people were simply trying to make ends meet on both sides of the Rio Grande.

When I visited Chambers at his office in January, his desk was makeshift: two long folding tables down the hall from a few other lawyers in a one-story brick building on the main street. The white stucco walls were empty; his diplomas were stored at his fiancée’s house. There was little to give away his roots. Then again, he spent much of his life severed from them.

The prize for winning was significant: 14,000 pesos ($765), which, coincidentally, was nearly the going rate for running drugs across the border.
In late 1991, when Chambers was four, his father was arrested in the largest drug bust on record in West Texas. Federal and state drug enforcement agents arrested Glyn Robert Chambers and the popular sheriff of Presidio County, Rick Thompson, after an informant tipped them off to a red horse trailer containing 2,400 pounds of cocaine on the fairgrounds in Marfa. It was big news, from the Big Bend Sentinel (“The Marfa Coke Bust,” it blared) all the way to the New York Times. There was no trial. They both pleaded guilty and were sentenced to life in prison. (Robert Chambers was released in 2005 after serving 13 years. Thompson is scheduled to get out April 14, 2018.)

Chambers remembers law enforcement coming to his house after his father had been arrested, though he was too young to comprehend the reason. He grew up believing he’d never see him again outside of prison. His mother, Christine, didn’t want to stay in Alpine because of the publicity. They moved up and down the Interstate 35 corridor so often that Chambers lost count of the number of schools he attended. It may have been thirty. When he was thirteen, they went to live with his mother’s family, in Abilene. There was no sewer connection in their trailer, and electricity came from an extension cord that stretched from his grandparents’ house. Soon after, his mother was arrested for possession with intent to distribute methamphetamine. In the years ahead, she cycled in and out of prison for similar charges. A pair of uncles on his mom’s side also went to prison for drug offenses, and so did a paternal uncle. He became frustrated with the legal system, which he felt was too focused on punishing his family members for their addictions rather than helping them.

After going to law school, in northwest Indiana, he thought he’d never return to West Texas, but it was Liz Rogers who persuaded him to come back. Rogers also came from a ranching family, and she found her calling with the federal defenders. In time, the backpackers she’d come to represent were known to ask for her by name. Chambers never forgot that first time he accompanied Rogers to jail as an intern. Her caseload was so large she had to meet with up to nine clients at a time, but she patiently explained to each one how their case would unfold and made them all laugh. He knew he’d never be able to hold an audience like that, but he realized then that this work was what he wanted to do.

Helping clients like Vega affirmed his decision, though it also generated no shortage of heartbreak. Six months after Vega’s case landed on Chambers’s desk, he managed to beat the meth rap. But Vega pleaded guilty to the marijuana charge; there was no other recourse. Vega didn’t know the men who’d recruited him, which is typical in backpacker cases, so they didn’t have any information to offer prosecutors in exchange for a shorter sentence. As a result, Vega—performing the lowest, most expendable role in the drug trade—carried the burden himself. Chambers told Vega that it was a good deal, and it helped when the Federal Bureau of Prisons sent back a recommendation of 46 months instead of 60. Even still, looking at the slight, dark-haired, shackled Vega, his anger bubbled up. Chambers thought about how Vega wouldn’t be there for his two sons as they grew into their teens. He knew what an absence like that could do to a family.

A month later, Chambers stood next to Vega again—this time in an El Paso courtroom—for a second and final hearing on his slightly improved sentence. In Spanish, the judge ran through the conditions of the imprisonment twice so Vega could understand. Then the judge asked Vega if he had anything to add. He did. He wanted to thank his lawyer for helping him. For Chambers, it was one of the saddest days of his life.

By 2010, entire communities had emptied out of the canyons, and some ten thousand had fled to the city of Chihuahua, where they were more easily conscripted into smuggling.
Tarahumara-land4.jpg A VIEW OF URIQUE CANYON.
WITH VEGA’S CASE resolved, Chambers moved on. There were many others to get to, almost too many to keep up with. When I stopped by his office one afternoon to see if he would visit Candelaria with me, he declined. He told me he was too busy with his caseload to make the three-hour trip. I still wanted to see the town where he had spent time as a boy-—where many backpackers make their crossing today—so instead, I went with Rogers.

We drove west to Marfa before hooking southwest through the Chinati Mountains. Wherever I looked, in Alpine and Marfa and later Presidio, I saw makeshift villages of turnkey houses, the whitewashed barracks of Border Patrol. Rogers pulled off on Farm-to-Market Road 2810, better known as Pinto Canyon Road, where the asphalt ended. The next 21 miles were unpaved. The wide, grassy highlands behind us appeared lush compared with the volcanic landscape ahead: canyons and mesas, haystack buttes and dry arroyos, a psychedelic moonscape with no end in sight, where the only color came from the sky.

I thought about Silvino, and I told Rogers about his case. She shook her head in wonder. Had he been arrested the second time in New Mexico, she said, he would have faced a mandatory five years in prison. “There has to be a better way to deal with this,” she said. “When you’re desperate, you’ll do anything. A little time in the Western District of Texas jail isn’t going to keep you from trying to feed your family.”

At the bottom of the canyon road, the asphalt resumed at a desolate village called Ruidosa. It was twelve miles north to Candelaria, where you could stand in the middle of town and see all of it: ramshackle trailers and a few adobe houses; Johnnie Chambers’s empty schoolhouse; an abandoned church and a corrugated-metal cotton gin. We hadn’t seen another car in two hours. Candelaria was well on its way to becoming a ghost town.

We drove up a small bluff, and Rogers led me to the grave of Boyd Chambers. His black-granite headstone outshone rows of wooden crosses. Mounds of melon-size rocks blanketed every grave. “He made a living in one of the harshest lands on the continent,” Rogers said.

She sometimes joked with Chambers that he didn’t know where his grandfather was buried, but he did. He just didn’t like coming here, and I could see why. It was a place people were trying to leave—to run from—not where you go to make something of yourself. He’d told me that sometimes he felt fated to stay in West Texas, and yet he often felt apart from it.

Rogers pointed to the barely visible Rio Grande just under a mile beyond, and San Antonio del Bravo farther still. This was the most common drug crossing in her cases, she said. In fact, Vega had come this way. After crossing the river here, backpackers hike past the old Chambers ranch to the top of the Sierra Vieja, where they look for their U.S. 90 pickup. It was at least forty miles through the driest landscape I’d ever seen. The only liquids to be found were two cans of Lone Star and three cans of Bud Light that had been left for Boyd at his headstone. In the distance, Rogers noticed a cloud of black smoke rising downriver. It turned out to be people burning salt cedar, an invasive species that saps water from the earth. They were more optimistic souls in a long line of people who have tried, often futilely, to farm the floodplain.

“Imagine walking this with forty-four pounds on your back,” she said, not counting food and water. “The Tarahumara would know how to survive this. They’re some of the toughest people in the world.”

Of course, drug traffickers also know this. Last summer, according to a courtroom interpreter, one witness in a backpacker trial in Pecos said that smugglers in Ojinaga told him they only wanted to work with Tarahumara, because of their strength and endurance. Puro Tarahumara de ahora en adelante.

IT WAS STILL dark when Silvino woke two hours before the big race in Cerocahui last October. His stomach was roiling. He hadn’t been feeling well and had visited a hospital the day before. He considered skipping the race, which was 37 miles, but the next event was four months away. He couldn’t count on his corn harvest to yield enough food for his family, and his chia project was still unpredictable. He had to run.

It was the eighth-annual ultramarathon here, and 120 runners, mostly Tarahumara, were going to set off from its plaza. They had come from as far away as Chihuahua, riding two buses for eleven hours combined. As Silvino left the San Isidro Lodge, where he had stayed the night, he glanced over at six mangy dogs and cats sleeping next to the embers of a nearby campfire. He looked up at the stars and thought about curses, as older Tarahumara runners tend to do before a race. He had grown up on the ancient tales of men who sprinkled bone dust on the course the night before, thought to induce fatigue in your competitors. He laughed at the memory of a rarajipari when an opposing team cast a spell on his team. His teammates became ill; he’d been the only one not stricken.

He didn’t believe in spells, but Silvino felt the pressure of what he’d come to do—not just for his own survival but for the survival of his people. The cartels were not letting up. Two weeks earlier, sicarios, or hit men, had stopped in Rejogochi to ask for Chávez, the young activist, and her father, Makawi. After drug traffickers had taken over the ejido in Basihuare, Makawi had given an interview to a newspaper in Chihuahua, describing the situation and the growing recruitment of Tarahumara youth into organized crime. In August 2016, Chávez had decried the work of the cartels in downtown Chihuahua on the International Day of the World’s Indigenous Peoples before a crowd of several thousand. Makawi had also met with the wives of those who, like Sebastian Vega, were in prison in the U.S. Word was spreading that the sicarios wanted to “eliminate” the two.

It was a twenty-minute drive downhill to the square, which Silvino would be running back up for the first leg of the race: these six miles were a steep climb of 1,500 feet. Nobody was warming up when he arrived; the Tarahumara don’t stretch. Silvino wore athletic gear and blue-and-yellow Asics—the trails were too slippery, the roads too hard, for huaraches. The female racers wore their everyday clothes: skirts full of reds, yellows, pinks, and blues, and matching head scarves to block the sun. It was cool now, but the temperature would climb into the 70s.

Ten minutes after six, the runners approached the starting line, adjacent to the three-hundred-year-old red-earthen, yellow-domed Jesuit church, and took off. The darkness lifted just beyond the otherwise dreary concrete plaza, revealing the fertile valley that gives Cerocahui its name: “between two mountains.” The slope up the mountainside was rocky and dusty, the soil eroded from years of logging and grazing. When they neared the San Isidro Lodge, Silvino was in fourth but still in range of the leaders. He passed the now extinguished fire pit and its dogs and cats, a fenced-in flock of garrulous turkeys, and local government officials eating breakfast inside the lodge’s small gazebo. From there, the runners followed white arrows spray-painted on the ground into a forest of piñon pine, juniper, and small oak trees. Sunlight broke through the slim canopy. The thick old-growth trees had been chopped down long ago and sent to the sawmills of nearby Bahuichivo. Silvino remembered the women in Huisuchi who used to weave baskets out of the pine needles.


Silvino running the Cerocahui ultramarathon, in Urique Canyon, in October 2016.
Silvino emerged from the forest onto a road—really a collection of rocks and dirt. Forty years ago, engineers had erected this road on top of an ancient Tarahumara foot trail. There were hairpin turns where the drop-off was thousands of feet, and he passed several roadside memorials. Here, Urique’s mayor and its public-works director had driven off the cliff almost four years ago. The newspapers alleged mechanical failure, but people heard otherwise: it was said that traffickers had murdered them in the middle of the night and pushed their car into the canyon. As Silvino continued to ascend, the only sounds were the buzz of white-eared hummingbirds and the musical trills of canyon and rock wrens.

At 7:48, Silvino spotted the worn arrow that directed runners to take the footpath to the scenic overlook called El Mirador del Cerro del Gallego. The explorer Lumholtz had surveyed Urique from up here more than a century ago. It was around the twelve-mile mark. He glanced over his right shoulder at the river that snaked through the canyon of the same name. Urique had an anthropomorphic quality from here: the peaks on either side of the river looked like heads, with an evergreen blanket sloped across their chests and legs. He scrambled down a cliff-side trail so narrow that only one person could traverse it at a time. Up here, he realized, right before the 2008 Semana Santa celebrations, assassins from the Sinaloa cartel had kidnapped around a dozen people from Urique—the chief of police, other officers, government officials—and beheaded all but two, whom they sent back to town, stripped naked and hands tied, to tell the story.

Silvino picked up speed as the trail descended toward the village of Porochi. He hadn’t eaten anything, not even the pocket-size bean burritos and salsa he normally ran with. He was starting to feel better—the steep climbs were behind him—and though he wouldn’t be able to catch the leader, he thought he could finish second or third. He recalled his 62-mile ultramarathon victory in Costa Rica, where he’d felt he might collapse. “I’m fighting for money,” he’d told himself. “If I don’t take the risk during a race, then I don’t get any reward.”

Silvino felt the pressure of what he’d come to do—not just for his own survival but for the survival of his people.
He passed fields with corn stalks as tall as the cabins beside them, and a few loose cows and goats. Then, with the path hugging a creek, he entered tiny Porochi. At the aid station, he declined water and collected a paper bracelet to confirm he had passed. He was in third place. The squat white ejido headquarters proclaimed Porochi as the Tierra de Corredores, or the “Land of Runners.” It was the halfway point. Silvino followed the creek, skirting red-and-white fields of poppy. The course turned toward Cerocahui on a footpath built by drug traffickers to carry out their crops.

Runners would have to reach the plaza, grab another bracelet, and then double back to the edge of town before returning. Silvino came into town only five minutes behind second place. A pair of federal police trucks rolled through with machine gunners standing in the bed, black scarves covering the bottom half of their faces. At the square, a dozen bedraggled municipal police, a few seemingly too young to grow facial hair, loitered with unloaded AK-47s—goat’s horns, they called them.

At 10:42, the first runner appeared on the cobblestone alley leading to the finish. Between sips of Guinness, the race organizer announced the winner’s name, hometown, and time. Volunteers were on hand to offer cheese sandwiches, bananas, and oranges. He crossed the finish line, accepted a sandwich, sat on a stone wall, and barely stirred for photographs with local officials. The smell of charcoal-grilled chicken filled the air.

Thirty minutes later, the second finisher arrived, and Silvino three minutes after him. There was little shade, and he dropped down on a set of steps next to four old campesinos. A pair of feral dogs dozed near Silvino’s feet. He ate a sandwich and drank a bottle of Coca-Cola. For finishing third, Silvino earned 8,000 pesos, enough to remain free of the cartels, at least for a while longer.

Early the next morning, with only a little pain in his right leg, Silvino drove in a low gear down the canyon to Urique, listening to traditional Tarahumara folk music from a USB stick connected to the CD player. Its wistful melody is reserved for joyous occasions, when Tarahumara dance to its repetitive interplay of violin and guitar. Three paper bracelets from the race still hung around his left wrist. He was back in the chia fields after breakfast.

Ryan Goldberg is a freelance journalist based in New York.


Copyright © Texas Monthly 2017. All rights reserved.
Texas Monthly – Featured
MENU

THEDRUG RUNNERS
PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAVID RAMOS
The Tarahumara of northern Mexico became famous for their ability to run incredibly long distances. In recent years, cartels have exploited their talents by forcing them to ferry drugs into the U.S. Now, with their land ravaged by violence, they’re running for their lives.

JULY 2017
| by RYAN GOLDBERG

Photographs by David Ramos
IT WAS A HALF hour after midnight and Silvino Cubesare Quimare was approaching the ghost town of Separ, in southwest New Mexico. Tall and lithe, his skin browned from years of laboring under the desert sun, he strode through the darkness. Strapped to his back were two homespun burlap packs, one filled with 45 pounds of marijuana bricks and the other with enough burritos and gallon jugs of water to survive another week in the wilderness. With him were five cousins and a nephew, each shouldering a similar load. They trudged silently past the scars of an old copper mining trail, long-gone railroad tracks and trading posts that once upon a time exchanged men, minerals, and equipment across the border to Chihuahua. Up ahead, they saw the lights of a highway and knew they were within a dozen miles of their drop-off. They’d reach it before daybreak.

It was April 2, 2010, and over five days they had traveled roughly five hundred miles from their village of Huisuchi, in the remote Sierra Madre mountains of northern Mexico. For months, Huisuchi had been cursed with drought. Though clouds had gathered off and on over the villagers’ homes—dark, billowing masses that overshadowed their huts among the fields of corn—it had not rained. The villagers had danced, and their children had tossed handfuls of water toward the sky, asking their god Onorúame for help, but relief had not come. By early spring their corn was burned on the stalk. Rather than face starvation, Silvino’s cousins had approached him with an idea: they could go on a drug-running mission across the border. It was a quick-paying job, and it would help their village. “You’re strong and you know the way,” they pleaded. “You’ve done this before.”

Silvino, a farmer with four children, knew the canyons the way urban dwellers know city streets: every rock, cactus, and river bend was a sign.
In fact, Silvino had carried a mochila, as the narcos called it, three times before. The reasons for this were, in some ways, fated. His people, an indigenous tribe of roughly 70,000 known as the Tarahumara, had originated on the lush plains east of the mountains. But beginning in the sixteenth century the tribe fled Spanish invaders, Jesuit missionaries, and Mexican settlers—and their fatal diseases, forced labor, and attempted conversions—retreating into the Sierra Madre’s forbidding landscape. They settled what would come to be known as the Sierra Tarahumara, an expansive network of canyons that are, at some points, deeper than the Grand Canyon, dropping 6,140 feet through three ecosystems. The most famous section, covered with lichen, is the color of oxidized copper. When the Norwegian explorer Carl Lumholtz stopped at the edge of one of these canyons, Urique, in the late nineteenth century, he couldn’t imagine anyone living below. In his book on his travels through the Sierra Madre mountains, Unknown Mexico, he recounts that when the Jesuits first arrived and asked the Tarahumara about the canyon’s depth, they replied, “Only the birds know.”

For centuries the Tarahumara got by as subsistence farmers. Their huts clung to the granite slopes and crevices of the canyons, which are connected by a vast system of narrow footpaths. In these rugged gorges, they developed a unique running style that eventually brought them fame. Either barefoot or in sandals (called huaraches) made from old tire treads and goat hide, they were able to traverse seemingly super-human distances. “Tarahumara” is a Spanish corruption of the tribe’s name, Rarámuri, meaning “ones with light feet” or “foot runners.”


Maria Juana Ramirez at the Cerocahui ultramarathon (37 miles) in Urique Canyon in October 2016.
Traditionally they ran as a form of religious ritual, such as to celebrate the harvest, in two-team races called rarajipari. For up to 24 hours—and sometimes longer—they kicked a small wooden ball across a rocky trail, and by the end of the race, teams often had only a few men left standing. But besides stamina, rarajipari demanded selflessness and strategy. In the days leading up to the race, competitors ground corn for an energy drink called pinole (and set aside a fermented version as their post-race celebratory beer, tesgüino). The afternoon before, the two teams walked the course, quarreling over its design and the number of laps. During the race, the slower runners tended to set the early pace, while the closers bided their time. Spectators wagered clothes, goats, or money on the outcome and lit the way at night with pine-resin torches.

The tribe’s runners had never ventured far from home and remained largely unknown until 1993, when an opportunistic American photographer named Rick Fisher brought several members, including a 55-year-old grandfather and a 40-something goat farmer, to an old Colorado mining town called Leadville to enter its 100-mile ultramarathon. The race was part of the budding sport of extreme long-distance trail running, in which race lengths range from slightly longer than the standard 26.2-mile marathon to more than 150 miles. Wearing sandals and swigging beers at the final aid station before the finish, the Tarahumara runners captured first, second, and fifth place and left behind hundreds of mesmerized competitors and fans.

Fisher struck deals with sponsors; he paid his runners with bags of corn and beans. When he returned with seven new competitors in 1994, they dominated the race again. The American ultramarathoner Micah True got to know some of the Tarahumara runners in Leadville, and he was so changed by the experience that he later moved to the Sierra Madre. But by the time he arrived, what he found was troubling: because of years of drought, famine, and encroaching cartel violence, in some areas the tribe’s running traditions were almost entirely dormant. Meanwhile, as ultramarathons surged in popularity, American runners began crushing previously held records. True wondered how they would fare against the Tarahumara, and he sought to revitalize these local traditions. In 2006, he persuaded Scott Jurek, the top American, to travel to Urique Canyon for a trail race he was organizing that is now known as the Ultra Caballo Blanco. He enticed locals to enter by promising food vouchers to anyone who finished. He also enlisted the two best Tarahumara runners: Silvino, who was 28 at the time, and his younger cousin Arnulfo Quimare Qui.

Silvino, a farmer with four children, knew the canyons the way urban dwellers know city streets: every rock, cactus, and river bend was a sign. He’d run rarajipari as a boy, and, per Tarahumara tradition, gambled on the race from an early age, winning soap, pens, and sometimes even a chicken. Running was in his blood. His mother had been a running champion in her day, and one of her sisters was the mother of Arnulfo, his greatest competitor. At the Caballo Blanco, both Silvino and Arnulfo proved themselves, and though Jurek passed Silvino near the end of the 47 miles, he couldn’t catch Arnulfo.

The journalist Christopher McDougall chronicled the race, and his ensuing book—Born to Run: A Hidden Tribe, Superathletes, and the Greatest Race the World Has Never Seen—became an international sensation, igniting a global running craze. He attributed part of the Tarahumara’s success to their minimal footwear; they ran with a lightness unfamiliar to American runners, landing on the midpoint of their foot instead of the heel. International runners and film crews descended on the Sierra Tarahumara. Multinational corporations seized the merchandising opportunities, and soon, people all over the world were wearing barefoot-style shoes. It seemed that everyone profited except the Tarahumara.

Mexican cartels, meanwhile, recognized an opportunity for a different sort of international commerce. Though the Tarahumara largely kept to themselves, poverty and hunger made them targets for narcos looking for mules willing to make the demanding trek to designated drug drop-off points in New Mexico, Arizona, and Texas. Cartel recruiters trolled the gas stations and plazas of small Mexican towns. They bought blue jeans for those wearing traditional loincloths and paired them with guides to lead them to the border at night. In the Tarahumara, the cartels found literal drug runners, who not only could cover incredible distances but were desperate enough to do it.


Silvino Cubesare Quimare in the fields near the town of Urique.
Silvino, with his farmland afflicted by unrelenting drought, was one of the desperate ones, so he signed on to tote drugs. Still, he got paid only if he successfully completed his mission. His first time, in 2005, he did just that, tossing his mochila into the back of a truck on a highway near El Paso. The second time, he completed his drop at a fancy hotel outside Las Cruces, New Mexico. The third time, though, in February 2007, Border Patrol agents found him and two others hiding in creosote bushes one hundred miles west of Las Cruces, with three backpacks that totaled 194 pounds. He was arrested and sentenced to eight months. And so when Micah True hosted the second Caballo Blanco, Silvino couldn’t make the race; he was sitting in a New Mexico prison.

After his release, it took Silvino two months to get home. Immigrations and Customs Enforcement agents left him in Juárez without enough money for a bus ticket home. He found a friend to front him enough to get to Janos, the first town on his route back. Once there, he picked chiles to earn the bus fare farther south to Chihuahua City, where he finally cobbled together the fare to Huisuchi by making cheese at a quesería.

Silvino swore he would never run drugs again, but by 2010, there was still not enough food to eat. His wife, Hilda, begged him not to go, but he felt he had no choice. He and his cousins would be paid 15,000 pesos ($825) apiece. In one week, he could make what usually took three months of labor in the Sierra—and there was little work. “A mí me vale,” Silvino told his wife. I think it’s worth it.

Now here he was, with six members of his own family—nearly a year after Born to Run had become an international best seller—striding through the dark up the boot heel of New Mexico. During the day, they slept beneath frayed creosote bushes, concealing their bags nearby, and at night they trudged north toward the freeway, avoiding rattlesnakes, coyotes, and most of all, la migra, the Border Patrol. They were close now, a few hours from their destination.

Then, all at once, they saw the spotlights. The Border Patrol had found them. Silvino flung his bags into the sand and began to run. Not again, he thought. He feared what might happen to his family if he went back to federal prison. An agent on a dirt bike tore after him as the others scattered. Silvino felt the adrenaline course through him, and he told himself to escape to the mountains they’d crossed on their way north. Amid the tall gray peaks and dry basins, he’d be harder to catch. Looking behind him, Silvino could see his nephew Luis flagging, but he couldn’t wait. He zigzagged around scrawny desert saplings, while the shadows cast by the dirt bike’s spotlight darted around him. He moved swiftly. He was conditioned to navigating switchbacks. Muy ligero, he told himself. Light-footed.

Soon the sound of the dirt bike faded. He had escaped, but Silvino continued running through the night, slept half of the next day, and then ran through the afternoon and the next night. He crossed abandoned desert valleys on old Apache land with nothing to eat, drinking only dung-infested runoff water. Two days later, he reached Ascensión, close to where they’d picked up the drugs. None of his companions had made it out. He had run one hundred miles.

Silvino flung his bags into the sand and began to run. Not again, he thought. He feared what might happen to his family if he went back to federal prison.
Tarahumara-WTexas.jpg PINTO CANYON ROAD, NEAR MARFA, TEXAS. PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN DAVIDSON.
PAUL CHAMBERS WAS sitting in his Alpine office when he got an email about a new client named Sebastian Vega Genoveva waiting for him in jail. It was March 2015, and the 27-year-old, with sandy-brown hair and a neatly cropped beard, was fresh out of law school. Unlike many of his classmates, he didn’t have to wait long for work. Not in West Texas.

Remote and rugged, West Texas, along with much of the southwestern United States, has long been a key drug-smuggling corridor. But in the nineties, as Mexican cartels rose in power relative to their Colombian counterparts—who preferred to traffic through South Florida—West Texas became even more essential. In the past twenty years, there has been a fivefold increase in Border Patrol agents working that stretch of border, up to nearly 20,000. By 2015, the tiny office of the federal public defenders in Alpine was tasked with the second-largest caseload in Texas, behind El Paso. Meanwhile, budget cuts meant the number of lawyers (four) stayed the same. The vast majority of cases were for illegal entry—immigration crimes eclipsed all other federal offenses—but they also saw increased numbers of traffickers. Many of these were caught and processed as so-called backpacker cases: groups of six or more Mexican men arrested in the mountains, each carrying about 45 pounds of marijuana. Unable to afford lawyers, each defendant was assigned one by the court. Federal public defenders were typically appointed the first defendant, and private attorneys, like Chambers, were tasked with the rest.

Scanning his new client’s arrest report, Chambers expected the details to coalesce into the usual pattern, but he noticed an anomaly.
Scanning his new client’s arrest report, Chambers expected the details to coalesce into the usual pattern, but he noticed an anomaly. When Border Patrol agents arrested this group of six and weighed the marijuana bricks—all 256 pounds—they realized that one felt different. Unwrapping it, they discovered a plastic container with a pound of methamphetamine inside. In backpacker cases, each defendant is on the hook for the entire load, not merely his own. Chambers dug out the sentencing guidelines: a scant .11 pounds of meth would double their potential sentences, from five to ten years. He dreaded telling his client.

The next day, he drove two hours with Liz Rogers, a thirty-year former federal defender known for pulling out long-shot victories, to the West Texas Detention Facility, in Sierra Blanca, to see Vega. Rogers, a family friend, was now a private attorney and had also been assigned a member of the group.

When Chambers was still in law school, in 2012, Rogers had helped introduce him to the federal courts that were handling the influx of people and drugs coming across the border. He accompanied her to court as an intern. He’d expected to see one person on trial. Instead, groups of up to two dozen Mexican nationals at a time, arrested for smuggling drugs or illegal entry, were marched in front of the judge throughout the day. Any other way, Chambers learned, and the courthouse would be backed up for years. That summer, he saw around four hundred cases come through the Alpine office, and within a few years its annual caseload had more than doubled. Chambers returned to school with one of Rogers’s mantras ringing in his ears: “procedural due process,” as opposed to actual due process. In one of his ethics courses, he told the class that what they were learning was a fantasy. “Well, that may happen there,” the professor responded, “but that’s not the way it’s supposed to happen.”

When Chambers arrived at the detention facility, the 39-year-old Vega stood up to greet his lawyer. The six-foot-two Chambers towered over him by more than a foot. At first, Vega didn’t seem to understand what Chambers was saying through his translator. Finally, after a few hours, Vega asked the translator if she could speak more slowly. He explained that Spanish was his second language. Vega, it turned out, was a Tarahumara.


Paul Chambers outside his Alpine law office on June 22, 2017. PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN DAVIDSON
Vega and his family had fled the canyons to find work in Chihuahua, and though he got a job as a brickmaker, it barely sustained them. Soon he was recruited to run drugs into Texas. He’d hoped that once there he could stay a short time and work—in the Permian Basin oil fields, perhaps—and then return home with money for his wife and two sons. But on the afternoon of March 6, Border Patrol agents found him and five others sleeping in the brush west of Marfa. After walking for ten days in the harsh borderland, their guide had abandoned them that morning.

As Chambers listened, he was struck by Vega’s guilelessness. Vega readily told him what had happened—as he did to the agents who arrested him, along with all but one in his group—but when Chambers described his offense, Vega couldn’t understand why the charges were so severe. How could he be responsible for all the backpacks when he only carried one? It didn’t make sense, Vega said, and worse, it was unfair.

Competitors from all over the world, electrified by "Born to Run", made the pilgrimage to the Tarahumara homeland. But racing couldn’t alleviate the hardships ravaging the Tarahumara themselves.
Chambers was impressed; none of his other clients had ever commented on the injustice of the law. He called his colleague and friend Jaime Escuder, who had also been assigned a defendant in the case. Escuder had recently defended a Tarahumara man in his fifties who, they realized, had been in Vega’s brickmaking crew. They lived in the same indigent neighborhood on the edge of Chihuahua. Escuder’s client had been sentenced to eighteen months in federal prison—six months longer than others in his group because he’d had the misfortune of appearing before a different judge. Around the same time, federal defenders in Alpine had represented a pair of Tarahumara teenagers also recruited in Chihuahua. While working a job canning chiles, they were told they could earn twice as much at a pecan orchard near the Rio Grande. When they arrived at the orchard, there were no pecans. Investigators from the federal public defender’s office had seen Tarahumara come through their West Texas offices for five years, as had their colleagues in nearby Las Cruces.

Chambers turned to the internet. He read about races that went on for several days and about the ultramarathon that now brought the best long-distance runners to the Sierra Madre. He read about villages that had no electricity or running water and that were full of ex-felons. The news coverage he could find estimated that more than a hundred Tarahumara had been arrested during the previous decade, but unless the defendants had to have a Rarámuri translator, like Escuder’s, their background had probably never come up. The actual number was likely much higher.

When he met Vega again, Chambers jokingly asked, “If you could run like that, why didn’t you escape?” Vega said he never could have evaded the agents in their trucks and helicopters. Chambers nodded. There were some things you couldn’t outrun.

IN MARCH 2010, a month before Silvino’s narrow escape in New Mexico, the annual Ultra Caballo Blanco had drawn a record number of international participants to Urique Canyon. Competitors from all over the world, electrified by Born to Run, made the pilgrimage to the Tarahumara homeland. But racing couldn’t alleviate the hardships ravaging the Tarahumara themselves. That year, many had shown up to the event starving, walking or hitchhiking from hundreds of miles around, bringing only the clothes on their backs. Urique’s head of tourism watched in tears as Tarahumara runners collapsed. Silvino could only muster twenty-fifth place.


Silvino on the cover of Runner’s World Mexico.
A few years earlier, the Sinaloa and Juárez cartels had begun escalating their fight for control of billion-dollar fields of marijuana and poppy in the so-called Golden Triangle, where the states of Chihuahua, Sinaloa, and Durango converge in the Sierra. To meet the surging demand for heroin in the United States, they also began seizing additional farmland in order to increase poppy cultivation. Many Tarahumara were forced to grow these crops, their wages docked and their land stolen. By 2010, entire communities had emptied out of the canyons, and some ten thousand had fled to the city of Chihuahua, where they were more easily conscripted into smuggling. There, it also became common to see Tarahumara children begging or selling candy and key chains on the streets.

For Silvino, new opportunities eventually arose from the attention generated by the book. Organizers across the world sought Tarahumara runners for their races, and those who moved comfortably among chabochi, or outsiders, began receiving regular invitations to race. So, after returning from his aborted drug run, Silvino saw his racing career take off. He finished second in an ultramarathon in Austria, the first of many races in more than half a dozen countries where his expenses were paid and the possible earnings were worth the trip. After successes in Costa Rica and Spain, he landed on the cover of Runner’s World México, in December 2014. He built a small adobe house for his wife and children and another for his parents and siblings, and he fixed up an old truck so he could bring his harvest into the town of Urique to sell. Still, racing never provided a stable income for Silvino—prize money wasn’t guaranteed—and most of the Tarahumara fared far worse.

As the cartel war ricocheted from one canyon to the next, Urique became one of the last towns to be engulfed by intense violence. It had once served as an outpost for tourists exploring the natural beauty of the surrounding canyons, which helped keep it relatively tranquil until a Sinaloa boss’s nephew was murdered there, in late 2014. From then on gunfire could routinely be heard in the town and up the canyon. In the days leading up to the 2015 Ultra Caballo Blanco, an eight-hour battle erupted in a village along the planned racecourse. International runners arrived to find armed gangs in the streets of Urique, while local government officials assured the competitors there were no problems. A day before the race, however, Juárez hit men stormed the police station, seizing two officers and a teenager, and American organizers called off the race. Most of the visiting runners, who had come from 23 countries, made their way out under military escort. More than five hundred Tarahumara, Silvino included, resolved to carry on anyway, and the mayor agreed to a version that cut out the downriver loop, where the major shoot-out had occurred.

A few months later, Sinaloa won control of the area—nearly a dozen planes flew out of the town of Urique in one day with the remaining Juárez fighters—but conditions worsened. With the Sinaloa in command, land theft and poppy growing increased.

Some Tarahumara activists tried to make their plight known, like Irma Chávez Cruz, a 25-year-old mother who was a friend of Silvino’s. Chávez had learned Spanish as a teenager, to serve as an interpreter for her people, then earned a university degree in ecology and gotten elected to local government. She worried about Tarahumara children losing their running traditions, so she regularly put on races in the region, including all-female events called ariweta. She helped organize the largest-ever recorded rarajipari in Chihuahua—Silvino led one of the teams—and together they traveled to Brazil, in October 2015, for the inaugural World Indigenous Games. The next year, Chávez ran in the Boston Marathon (possibly the first Tarahumara woman to do so) and, while there, spoke on a panel about indigenous running traditions. Together with her father, an activist, musician, and poet known as Makawi, she pleaded for government officials in Chihuahua to help prevent drug traffickers from stealing their land and their water. But help never came, and speaking out became risky. According to the Mexico City–based magazine Proceso, at least five indigenous activists were assassinated in 2015 and 2016.

In the summer of 2016, drug traffickers moved on the town of Basihuare, near Chávez’s hometown of Rejogochi, stealing the funds from the town’s ejido, a government-supported agriculture cooperative. After razing the corn and bean fields, they planted poppies instead.


Mickey Mahaffey, a 64-year-old American, has lived among the Tarahumara for two decades. Last summer, he hired Silvino to help manage a chia cultivation project.
That same summer, Silvino landed a job as a manager for a chia cultivation project for 400 pesos (about $20) a day. A fine salary, but it was an experimental crop: a 64-year-old American named Mickey Mahaffey, who had lived among the Tarahumara for two decades and married Silvino’s younger sister, Carmen, struck up a deal to grow eight acres for an energy-bar company based in Richmond, Virginia. Even for a strong farmer like Silvino, who used oxen to plough his fields in Huisuchi, cultivating chia in Urique proved biblical in its afflictions. In the middle of August, Silvino and seven others cleared eight acres of weeds by hand amid a plague of red ants, tarantulas, bees, gnats, flies, scorpions, snakes, floods, and 125-degree heat. It doubled as his race training.

Silvino couldn’t compete in the U.S. because of his arrest record, but he still needed to race to remain financially free of the cartels, so he often stuck to races closer to home, like the upcoming ultramarathon in Cerocahui, which included a four-thousand-foot ascent up a road out of Urique. Two runners in their mid-twenties were planning to challenge him, and the prize for winning was significant: 14,000 pesos ($765), which, coincidentally, was nearly the going rate for running drugs across the border.

IF CIRCUMSTANCES ONCE again drove Silvino to carry another drug load, he’d be risking a potentially lengthy prison term. Chambers had seen many of these harsh sentences handed out, including to drug runners who were essentially forced into smuggling. Still, of the dozens and dozens of clients he’d defended, it was Vega, and the plight of the Tarahumara, that stuck with him.

Chambers grew up on the border. His late paternal grandfather, Boyd, was a rancher on the Sierra Vieja, a small mountain range that locals call the Candelaria Rimrock, after the nearest town. Roughly forty miles northwest of Big Bend Ranch State Park, it is a place of extremes, a dry, barren land that is only ever hot or cold. It’s untamable, though his family certainly tried. Like the Tarahumara, the Chambers clan was inexorably tied to their land.

Growing up, his love for the ranch—bouncing over Capote Creek in his grandfather’s truck, watching the men ride out with the cattle while mounted on his own pony—was matched by his admiration for the tough people who worked it. Chambers remembers his grandfather watching the Weather Channel regularly, hoping for rain. To help keep them on the ranch, his grandmother Johnnie earned a teaching degree from Sul Ross State University in her forties, and she ran the two-room schoolhouse in Candelaria for 25 years. His grandfather served as a Presidio County commissioner and was often asked to resolve border disputes privately. Back then, nationality didn’t matter as much; people were simply trying to make ends meet on both sides of the Rio Grande.

When I visited Chambers at his office in January, his desk was makeshift: two long folding tables down the hall from a few other lawyers in a one-story brick building on the main street. The white stucco walls were empty; his diplomas were stored at his fiancée’s house. There was little to give away his roots. Then again, he spent much of his life severed from them.

The prize for winning was significant: 14,000 pesos ($765), which, coincidentally, was nearly the going rate for running drugs across the border.
In late 1991, when Chambers was four, his father was arrested in the largest drug bust on record in West Texas. Federal and state drug enforcement agents arrested Glyn Robert Chambers and the popular sheriff of Presidio County, Rick Thompson, after an informant tipped them off to a red horse trailer containing 2,400 pounds of cocaine on the fairgrounds in Marfa. It was big news, from the Big Bend Sentinel (“The Marfa Coke Bust,” it blared) all the way to the New York Times. There was no trial. They both pleaded guilty and were sentenced to life in prison. (Robert Chambers was released in 2005 after serving 13 years. Thompson is scheduled to get out April 14, 2018.)

Chambers remembers law enforcement coming to his house after his father had been arrested, though he was too young to comprehend the reason. He grew up believing he’d never see him again outside of prison. His mother, Christine, didn’t want to stay in Alpine because of the publicity. They moved up and down the Interstate 35 corridor so often that Chambers lost count of the number of schools he attended. It may have been thirty. When he was thirteen, they went to live with his mother’s family, in Abilene. There was no sewer connection in their trailer, and electricity came from an extension cord that stretched from his grandparents’ house. Soon after, his mother was arrested for possession with intent to distribute methamphetamine. In the years ahead, she cycled in and out of prison for similar charges. A pair of uncles on his mom’s side also went to prison for drug offenses, and so did a paternal uncle. He became frustrated with the legal system, which he felt was too focused on punishing his family members for their addictions rather than helping them.

After going to law school, in northwest Indiana, he thought he’d never return to West Texas, but it was Liz Rogers who persuaded him to come back. Rogers also came from a ranching family, and she found her calling with the federal defenders. In time, the backpackers she’d come to represent were known to ask for her by name. Chambers never forgot that first time he accompanied Rogers to jail as an intern. Her caseload was so large she had to meet with up to nine clients at a time, but she patiently explained to each one how their case would unfold and made them all laugh. He knew he’d never be able to hold an audience like that, but he realized then that this work was what he wanted to do.

Helping clients like Vega affirmed his decision, though it also generated no shortage of heartbreak. Six months after Vega’s case landed on Chambers’s desk, he managed to beat the meth rap. But Vega pleaded guilty to the marijuana charge; there was no other recourse. Vega didn’t know the men who’d recruited him, which is typical in backpacker cases, so they didn’t have any information to offer prosecutors in exchange for a shorter sentence. As a result, Vega—performing the lowest, most expendable role in the drug trade—carried the burden himself. Chambers told Vega that it was a good deal, and it helped when the Federal Bureau of Prisons sent back a recommendation of 46 months instead of 60. Even still, looking at the slight, dark-haired, shackled Vega, his anger bubbled up. Chambers thought about how Vega wouldn’t be there for his two sons as they grew into their teens. He knew what an absence like that could do to a family.

A month later, Chambers stood next to Vega again—this time in an El Paso courtroom—for a second and final hearing on his slightly improved sentence. In Spanish, the judge ran through the conditions of the imprisonment twice so Vega could understand. Then the judge asked Vega if he had anything to add. He did. He wanted to thank his lawyer for helping him. For Chambers, it was one of the saddest days of his life.

By 2010, entire communities had emptied out of the canyons, and some ten thousand had fled to the city of Chihuahua, where they were more easily conscripted into smuggling.
Tarahumara-land4.jpg A VIEW OF URIQUE CANYON.
WITH VEGA’S CASE resolved, Chambers moved on. There were many others to get to, almost too many to keep up with. When I stopped by his office one afternoon to see if he would visit Candelaria with me, he declined. He told me he was too busy with his caseload to make the three-hour trip. I still wanted to see the town where he had spent time as a boy-—where many backpackers make their crossing today—so instead, I went with Rogers.

We drove west to Marfa before hooking southwest through the Chinati Mountains. Wherever I looked, in Alpine and Marfa and later Presidio, I saw makeshift villages of turnkey houses, the whitewashed barracks of Border Patrol. Rogers pulled off on Farm-to-Market Road 2810, better known as Pinto Canyon Road, where the asphalt ended. The next 21 miles were unpaved. The wide, grassy highlands behind us appeared lush compared with the volcanic landscape ahead: canyons and mesas, haystack buttes and dry arroyos, a psychedelic moonscape with no end in sight, where the only color came from the sky.

I thought about Silvino, and I told Rogers about his case. She shook her head in wonder. Had he been arrested the second time in New Mexico, she said, he would have faced a mandatory five years in prison. “There has to be a better way to deal with this,” she said. “When you’re desperate, you’ll do anything. A little time in the Western District of Texas jail isn’t going to keep you from trying to feed your family.”

At the bottom of the canyon road, the asphalt resumed at a desolate village called Ruidosa. It was twelve miles north to Candelaria, where you could stand in the middle of town and see all of it: ramshackle trailers and a few adobe houses; Johnnie Chambers’s empty schoolhouse; an abandoned church and a corrugated-metal cotton gin. We hadn’t seen another car in two hours. Candelaria was well on its way to becoming a ghost town.

We drove up a small bluff, and Rogers led me to the grave of Boyd Chambers. His black-granite headstone outshone rows of wooden crosses. Mounds of melon-size rocks blanketed every grave. “He made a living in one of the harshest lands on the continent,” Rogers said.

She sometimes joked with Chambers that he didn’t know where his grandfather was buried, but he did. He just didn’t like coming here, and I could see why. It was a place people were trying to leave—to run from—not where you go to make something of yourself. He’d told me that sometimes he felt fated to stay in West Texas, and yet he often felt apart from it.

Rogers pointed to the barely visible Rio Grande just under a mile beyond, and San Antonio del Bravo farther still. This was the most common drug crossing in her cases, she said. In fact, Vega had come this way. After crossing the river here, backpackers hike past the old Chambers ranch to the top of the Sierra Vieja, where they look for their U.S. 90 pickup. It was at least forty miles through the driest landscape I’d ever seen. The only liquids to be found were two cans of Lone Star and three cans of Bud Light that had been left for Boyd at his headstone. In the distance, Rogers noticed a cloud of black smoke rising downriver. It turned out to be people burning salt cedar, an invasive species that saps water from the earth. They were more optimistic souls in a long line of people who have tried, often futilely, to farm the floodplain.

“Imagine walking this with forty-four pounds on your back,” she said, not counting food and water. “The Tarahumara would know how to survive this. They’re some of the toughest people in the world.”

Of course, drug traffickers also know this. Last summer, according to a courtroom interpreter, one witness in a backpacker trial in Pecos said that smugglers in Ojinaga told him they only wanted to work with Tarahumara, because of their strength and endurance. Puro Tarahumara de ahora en adelante.

IT WAS STILL dark when Silvino woke two hours before the big race in Cerocahui last October. His stomach was roiling. He hadn’t been feeling well and had visited a hospital the day before. He considered skipping the race, which was 37 miles, but the next event was four months away. He couldn’t count on his corn harvest to yield enough food for his family, and his chia project was still unpredictable. He had to run.

It was the eighth-annual ultramarathon here, and 120 runners, mostly Tarahumara, were going to set off from its plaza. They had come from as far away as Chihuahua, riding two buses for eleven hours combined. As Silvino left the San Isidro Lodge, where he had stayed the night, he glanced over at six mangy dogs and cats sleeping next to the embers of a nearby campfire. He looked up at the stars and thought about curses, as older Tarahumara runners tend to do before a race. He had grown up on the ancient tales of men who sprinkled bone dust on the course the night before, thought to induce fatigue in your competitors. He laughed at the memory of a rarajipari when an opposing team cast a spell on his team. His teammates became ill; he’d been the only one not stricken.

He didn’t believe in spells, but Silvino felt the pressure of what he’d come to do—not just for his own survival but for the survival of his people. The cartels were not letting up. Two weeks earlier, sicarios, or hit men, had stopped in Rejogochi to ask for Chávez, the young activist, and her father, Makawi. After drug traffickers had taken over the ejido in Basihuare, Makawi had given an interview to a newspaper in Chihuahua, describing the situation and the growing recruitment of Tarahumara youth into organized crime. In August 2016, Chávez had decried the work of the cartels in downtown Chihuahua on the International Day of the World’s Indigenous Peoples before a crowd of several thousand. Makawi had also met with the wives of those who, like Sebastian Vega, were in prison in the U.S. Word was spreading that the sicarios wanted to “eliminate” the two.

It was a twenty-minute drive downhill to the square, which Silvino would be running back up for the first leg of the race: these six miles were a steep climb of 1,500 feet. Nobody was warming up when he arrived; the Tarahumara don’t stretch. Silvino wore athletic gear and blue-and-yellow Asics—the trails were too slippery, the roads too hard, for huaraches. The female racers wore their everyday clothes: skirts full of reds, yellows, pinks, and blues, and matching head scarves to block the sun. It was cool now, but the temperature would climb into the 70s.

Ten minutes after six, the runners approached the starting line, adjacent to the three-hundred-year-old red-earthen, yellow-domed Jesuit church, and took off. The darkness lifted just beyond the otherwise dreary concrete plaza, revealing the fertile valley that gives Cerocahui its name: “between two mountains.” The slope up the mountainside was rocky and dusty, the soil eroded from years of logging and grazing. When they neared the San Isidro Lodge, Silvino was in fourth but still in range of the leaders. He passed the now extinguished fire pit and its dogs and cats, a fenced-in flock of garrulous turkeys, and local government officials eating breakfast inside the lodge’s small gazebo. From there, the runners followed white arrows spray-painted on the ground into a forest of piñon pine, juniper, and small oak trees. Sunlight broke through the slim canopy. The thick old-growth trees had been chopped down long ago and sent to the sawmills of nearby Bahuichivo. Silvino remembered the women in Huisuchi who used to weave baskets out of the pine needles.


Silvino running the Cerocahui ultramarathon, in Urique Canyon, in October 2016.
Silvino emerged from the forest onto a road—really a collection of rocks and dirt. Forty years ago, engineers had erected this road on top of an ancient Tarahumara foot trail. There were hairpin turns where the drop-off was thousands of feet, and he passed several roadside memorials. Here, Urique’s mayor and its public-works director had driven off the cliff almost four years ago. The newspapers alleged mechanical failure, but people heard otherwise: it was said that traffickers had murdered them in the middle of the night and pushed their car into the canyon. As Silvino continued to ascend, the only sounds were the buzz of white-eared hummingbirds and the musical trills of canyon and rock wrens.

At 7:48, Silvino spotted the worn arrow that directed runners to take the footpath to the scenic overlook called El Mirador del Cerro del Gallego. The explorer Lumholtz had surveyed Urique from up here more than a century ago. It was around the twelve-mile mark. He glanced over his right shoulder at the river that snaked through the canyon of the same name. Urique had an anthropomorphic quality from here: the peaks on either side of the river looked like heads, with an evergreen blanket sloped across their chests and legs. He scrambled down a cliff-side trail so narrow that only one person could traverse it at a time. Up here, he realized, right before the 2008 Semana Santa celebrations, assassins from the Sinaloa cartel had kidnapped around a dozen people from Urique—the chief of police, other officers, government officials—and beheaded all but two, whom they sent back to town, stripped naked and hands tied, to tell the story.

Silvino picked up speed as the trail descended toward the village of Porochi. He hadn’t eaten anything, not even the pocket-size bean burritos and salsa he normally ran with. He was starting to feel better—the steep climbs were behind him—and though he wouldn’t be able to catch the leader, he thought he could finish second or third. He recalled his 62-mile ultramarathon victory in Costa Rica, where he’d felt he might collapse. “I’m fighting for money,” he’d told himself. “If I don’t take the risk during a race, then I don’t get any reward.”

Silvino felt the pressure of what he’d come to do—not just for his own survival but for the survival of his people.
He passed fields with corn stalks as tall as the cabins beside them, and a few loose cows and goats. Then, with the path hugging a creek, he entered tiny Porochi. At the aid station, he declined water and collected a paper bracelet to confirm he had passed. He was in third place. The squat white ejido headquarters proclaimed Porochi as the Tierra de Corredores, or the “Land of Runners.” It was the halfway point. Silvino followed the creek, skirting red-and-white fields of poppy. The course turned toward Cerocahui on a footpath built by drug traffickers to carry out their crops.

Runners would have to reach the plaza, grab another bracelet, and then double back to the edge of town before returning. Silvino came into town only five minutes behind second place. A pair of federal police trucks rolled through with machine gunners standing in the bed, black scarves covering the bottom half of their faces. At the square, a dozen bedraggled municipal police, a few seemingly too young to grow facial hair, loitered with unloaded AK-47s—goat’s horns, they called them.

At 10:42, the first runner appeared on the cobblestone alley leading to the finish. Between sips of Guinness, the race organizer announced the winner’s name, hometown, and time. Volunteers were on hand to offer cheese sandwiches, bananas, and oranges. He crossed the finish line, accepted a sandwich, sat on a stone wall, and barely stirred for photographs with local officials. The smell of charcoal-grilled chicken filled the air.

Thirty minutes later, the second finisher arrived, and Silvino three minutes after him. There was little shade, and he dropped down on a set of steps next to four old campesinos. A pair of feral dogs dozed near Silvino’s feet. He ate a sandwich and drank a bottle of Coca-Cola. For finishing third, Silvino earned 8,000 pesos, enough to remain free of the cartels, at least for a while longer.

Early the next morning, with only a little pain in his right leg, Silvino drove in a low gear down the canyon to Urique, listening to traditional Tarahumara folk music from a USB stick connected to the CD player. Its wistful melody is reserved for joyous occasions, when Tarahumara dance to its repetitive interplay of violin and guitar. Three paper bracelets from the race still hung around his left wrist. He was back in the chia fields after breakfast.

Ryan Goldberg is a freelance journalist based in New York.


Copyright © Texas Monthly 2017. All rights reserved.
ShareThis Copy and Paste MENU THEDRUG RUNNERS PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAVID RAMOS The Tarahumara of northern Mexico became famous for their ability to run incredibly long distances. In recent years, cartels have exploited their talents by forcing them to ferry drugs into the U.S. Now, with their land ravaged by violence, they’re running for their lives. JULY 2017 | by RYAN GOLDBERG Photographs by David Ramos IT WAS A HALF hour after midnight and Silvino Cubesare Quimare was approaching the ghost town of Separ, in southwest New Mexico. Tall and lithe, his skin browned from years of laboring under the desert sun, he strode through the darkness. Strapped to his back were two homespun burlap packs, one filled with 45 pounds of marijuana bricks and the other with enough burritos and gallon jugs of water to survive another week in the wilderness. With him were five cousins and a nephew, each shouldering a similar load. They trudged silently past the scars of an old copper mining trail, long-gone railroad tracks and trading posts that once upon a time exchanged men, minerals, and equipment across the border to Chihuahua. Up ahead, they saw the lights of a highway and knew they were within a dozen miles of their drop-off. They’d reach it before daybreak. It was April 2, 2010, and over five days they had traveled roughly five hundred miles from their village of Huisuchi, in the remote Sierra Madre mountains of northern Mexico. For months, Huisuchi had been cursed with drought. Though clouds had gathered off and on over the villagers’ homes—dark, billowing masses that overshadowed their huts among the fields of corn—it had not rained. The villagers had danced, and their children had tossed handfuls of water toward the sky, asking their god Onorúame for help, but relief had not come. By early spring their corn was burned on the stalk. Rather than face starvation, Silvino’s cousins had approached him with an idea: they could go on a drug-running mission across the border. It was a quick-paying job, and it would help their village. “You’re strong and you know the way,” they pleaded. “You’ve done this before.” Silvino, a farmer with four children, knew the canyons the way urban dwellers know city streets: every rock, cactus, and river bend was a sign. In fact, Silvino had carried a mochila, as the narcos called it, three times before. The reasons for this were, in some ways, fated. His people, an indigenous tribe of roughly 70,000 known as the Tarahumara, had originated on the lush plains east of the mountains. But beginning in the sixteenth century the tribe fled Spanish invaders, Jesuit missionaries, and Mexican settlers—and their fatal diseases, forced labor, and attempted conversions—retreating into the Sierra Madre’s forbidding landscape. They settled what would come to be known as the Sierra Tarahumara, an expansive network of canyons that are, at some points, deeper than the Grand Canyon, dropping 6,140 feet through three ecosystems. The most famous section, covered with lichen, is the color of oxidized copper. When the Norwegian explorer Carl Lumholtz stopped at the edge of one of these canyons, Urique, in the late nineteenth century, he couldn’t imagine anyone living below. In his book on his travels through the Sierra Madre mountains, Unknown Mexico, he recounts that when the Jesuits first arrived and asked the Tarahumara about the canyon’s depth, they replied, “Only the birds know.” For centuries the Tarahumara got by as subsistence farmers. Their huts clung to the granite slopes and crevices of the canyons, which are connected by a vast system of narrow footpaths. In these rugged gorges, they developed a unique running style that eventually brought them fame. Either barefoot or in sandals (called huaraches) made from old tire treads and goat hide, they were able to traverse seemingly super-human distances. “Tarahumara” is a Spanish corruption of the tribe’s name, Rarámuri, meaning “ones with light feet” or “foot runners.” Maria Juana Ramirez at the Cerocahui ultramarathon (37 miles) in Urique Canyon in October 2016. Traditionally they ran as a form of religious ritual, such as to celebrate the harvest, in two-team races called rarajipari. For up to 24 hours—and sometimes longer—they kicked a small wooden ball across a rocky trail, and by the end of the race, teams often had only a few men left standing. But besides stamina, rarajipari demanded selflessness and strategy. In the days leading up to the race, competitors ground corn for an energy drink called pinole (and set aside a fermented version as their post-race celebratory beer, tesgüino). The afternoon before, the two teams walked the course, quarreling over its design and the number of laps. During the race, the slower runners tended to set the early pace, while the closers bided their time. Spectators wagered clothes, goats, or money on the outcome and lit the way at night with pine-resin torches. The tribe’s runners had never ventured far from home and remained largely unknown until 1993, when an opportunistic American photographer named Rick Fisher brought several members, including a 55-year-old grandfather and a 40-something goat farmer, to an old Colorado mining town called Leadville to enter its 100-mile ultramarathon. The race was part of the budding sport of extreme long-distance trail running, in which race lengths range from slightly longer than the standard 26.2-mile marathon to more than 150 miles. Wearing sandals and swigging beers at the final aid station before the finish, the Tarahumara runners captured first, second, and fifth place and left behind hundreds of mesmerized competitors and fans. Fisher struck deals with sponsors; he paid his runners with bags of corn and beans. When he returned with seven new competitors in 1994, they dominated the race again. The American ultramarathoner Micah True got to know some of the Tarahumara runners in Leadville, and he was so changed by the experience that he later moved to the Sierra Madre. But by the time he arrived, what he found was troubling: because of years of drought, famine, and encroaching cartel violence, in some areas the tribe’s running traditions were almost entirely dormant. Meanwhile, as ultramarathons surged in popularity, American runners began crushing previously held records. True wondered how they would fare against the Tarahumara, and he sought to revitalize these local traditions. In 2006, he persuaded Scott Jurek, the top American, to travel to Urique Canyon for a trail race he was organizing that is now known as the Ultra Caballo Blanco. He enticed locals to enter by promising food vouchers to anyone who finished. He also enlisted the two best Tarahumara runners: Silvino, who was 28 at the time, and his younger cousin Arnulfo Quimare Qui. Silvino, a farmer with four children, knew the canyons the way urban dwellers know city streets: every rock, cactus, and river bend was a sign. He’d run rarajipari as a boy, and, per Tarahumara tradition, gambled on the race from an early age, winning soap, pens, and sometimes even a chicken. Running was in his blood. His mother had been a running champion in her day, and one of her sisters was the mother of Arnulfo, his greatest competitor. At the Caballo Blanco, both Silvino and Arnulfo proved themselves, and though Jurek passed Silvino near the end of the 47 miles, he couldn’t catch Arnulfo.  The journalist Christopher McDougall chronicled the race, and his ensuing book—Born to Run: A Hidden Tribe, Superathletes, and the Greatest Race the World Has Never Seen—became an international sensation, igniting a global running craze. He attributed part of the Tarahumara’s success to their minimal footwear; they ran with a lightness unfamiliar to American runners, landing on the midpoint of their foot instead of the heel. International runners and film crews descended on the Sierra Tarahumara. Multinational corporations seized the merchandising opportunities, and soon, people all over the world were wearing barefoot-style shoes. It seemed that everyone profited except the Tarahumara. Mexican cartels, meanwhile, recognized an opportunity for a different sort of international commerce. Though the Tarahumara largely kept to themselves, poverty and hunger made them targets for narcos looking for mules willing to make the demanding trek to designated drug drop-off points in New Mexico, Arizona, and Texas. Cartel recruiters trolled the gas stations and plazas of small Mexican towns. They bought blue jeans for those wearing traditional loincloths and paired them with guides to lead them to the border at night. In the Tarahumara, the cartels found literal drug runners, who not only could cover incredible distances but were desperate enough to do it.  Silvino Cubesare Quimare in the fields near the town of Urique. Silvino, with his farmland afflicted by unrelenting drought, was one of the desperate ones, so he signed on to tote drugs. Still, he got paid only if he successfully completed his mission. His first time, in 2005, he did just that, tossing his mochila into the back of a truck on a highway near El Paso. The second time, he completed his drop at a fancy hotel outside Las Cruces, New Mexico. The third time, though, in February 2007, Border Patrol agents found him and two others hiding in creosote bushes one hundred miles west of Las Cruces, with three backpacks that totaled 194 pounds. He was arrested and sentenced to eight months. And so when Micah True hosted the second Caballo Blanco, Silvino couldn’t make the race; he was sitting in a New Mexico prison. After his release, it took Silvino two months to get home. Immigrations and Customs Enforcement agents left him in Juárez without enough money for a bus ticket home. He found a friend to front him enough to get to Janos, the first town on his route back. Once there, he picked chiles to earn the bus fare farther south to Chihuahua City, where he finally cobbled together the fare to Huisuchi by making cheese at a quesería. Silvino swore he would never run drugs again, but by 2010, there was still not enough food to eat. His wife, Hilda, begged him not to go, but he felt he had no choice. He and his cousins would be paid 15,000 pesos ($825) apiece. In one week, he could make what usually took three months of labor in the Sierra—and there was little work. “A mí me vale,” Silvino told his wife. I think it’s worth it. Now here he was, with six members of his own family—nearly a year after Born to Run had become an international best seller—striding through the dark up the boot heel of New Mexico. During the day, they slept beneath frayed creosote bushes, concealing their bags nearby, and at night they trudged north toward the freeway, avoiding rattlesnakes, coyotes, and most of all, la migra, the Border Patrol. They were close now, a few hours from their destination. Then, all at once, they saw the spotlights. The Border Patrol had found them. Silvino flung his bags into the sand and began to run. Not again, he thought. He feared what might happen to his family if he went back to federal prison. An agent on a dirt bike tore after him as the others scattered. Silvino felt the adrenaline course through him, and he told himself to escape to the mountains they’d crossed on their way north. Amid the tall gray peaks and dry basins, he’d be harder to catch. Looking behind him, Silvino could see his nephew Luis flagging, but he couldn’t wait. He zigzagged around scrawny desert saplings, while the shadows cast by the dirt bike’s spotlight darted around him. He moved swiftly. He was conditioned to navigating switchbacks. Muy ligero, he told himself. Light-footed. Soon the sound of the dirt bike faded. He had escaped, but Silvino continued running through the night, slept half of the next day, and then ran through the afternoon and the next night. He crossed abandoned desert valleys on old Apache land with nothing to eat, drinking only dung-infested runoff water. Two days later, he reached Ascensión, close to where they’d picked up the drugs. None of his companions had made it out. He had run one hundred miles. Silvino flung his bags into the sand and began to run. Not again, he thought. He feared what might happen to his family if he went back to federal prison. PINTO CANYON ROAD, NEAR MARFA, TEXAS. PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN DAVIDSON. PAUL CHAMBERS WAS sitting in his Alpine office when he got an email about a new client named Sebastian Vega Genoveva waiting for him in jail. It was March 2015, and the 27-year-old, with sandy-brown hair and a neatly cropped beard, was fresh out of law school. Unlike many of his classmates, he didn’t have to wait long for work. Not in West Texas. Remote and rugged, West Texas, along with much of the southwestern United States, has long been a key drug-smuggling corridor. But in the nineties, as Mexican cartels rose in power relative to their Colombian counterparts—who preferred to traffic through South Florida—West Texas became even more essential. In the past twenty years, there has been a fivefold increase in Border Patrol agents working that stretch of border, up to nearly 20,000. By 2015, the tiny office of the federal public defenders in Alpine was tasked with the second-largest caseload in Texas, behind El Paso. Meanwhile, budget cuts meant the number of lawyers (four) stayed the same. The vast majority of cases were for illegal entry—immigration crimes eclipsed all other federal offenses—but they also saw increased numbers of traffickers. Many of these were caught and processed as so-called backpacker cases: groups of six or more Mexican men arrested in the mountains, each carrying about 45 pounds of marijuana. Unable to afford lawyers, each defendant was assigned one by the court. Federal public defenders were typically appointed the first defendant, and private attorneys, like Chambers, were tasked with the rest. Scanning his new client’s arrest report, Chambers expected the details to coalesce into the usual pattern, but he noticed an anomaly. Scanning his new client’s arrest report, Chambers expected the details to coalesce into the usual pattern, but he noticed an anomaly. When Border Patrol agents arrested this group of six and weighed the marijuana bricks—all 256 pounds—they realized that one felt different. Unwrapping it, they discovered a plastic container with a pound of methamphetamine inside. In backpacker cases, each defendant is on the hook for the entire load, not merely his own. Chambers dug out the sentencing guidelines: a scant .11 pounds of meth would double their potential sentences, from five to ten years. He dreaded telling his client. The next day, he drove two hours with Liz Rogers, a thirty-year former federal defender known for pulling out long-shot victories, to the West Texas Detention Facility, in Sierra Blanca, to see Vega. Rogers, a family friend, was now a private attorney and had also been assigned a member of the group. When Chambers was still in law school, in 2012, Rogers had helped introduce him to the federal courts that were handling the influx of people and drugs coming across the border. He accompanied her to court as an intern. He’d expected to see one person on trial. Instead, groups of up to two dozen Mexican nationals at a time, arrested for smuggling drugs or illegal entry, were marched in front of the judge throughout the day. Any other way, Chambers learned, and the courthouse would be backed up for years. That summer, he saw around four hundred cases come through the Alpine office, and within a few years its annual caseload had more than doubled. Chambers returned to school with one of Rogers’s mantras ringing in his ears: “procedural due process,” as opposed to actual due process. In one of his ethics courses, he told the class that what they were learning was a fantasy. “Well, that may happen there,” the professor responded, “but that’s not the way it’s supposed to happen.” When Chambers arrived at the detention facility, the 39-year-old Vega stood up to greet his lawyer. The six-foot-two Chambers towered over him by more than a foot. At first, Vega didn’t seem to understand what Chambers was saying through his translator. Finally, after a few hours, Vega asked the translator if she could speak more slowly. He explained that Spanish was his second language. Vega, it turned out, was a Tarahumara. Paul Chambers outside his Alpine law office on June 22, 2017. PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN DAVIDSON Vega and his family had fled the canyons to find work in Chihuahua, and though he got a job as a brickmaker, it barely sustained them. Soon he was recruited to run drugs into Texas. He’d hoped that once there he could stay a short time and work—in the Permian Basin oil fields, perhaps—and then return home with money for his wife and two sons. But on the afternoon of March 6, Border Patrol agents found him and five others sleeping in the brush west of Marfa. After walking for ten days in the harsh borderland, their guide had abandoned them that morning. As Chambers listened, he was struck by Vega’s guilelessness. Vega readily told him what had happened—as he did to the agents who arrested him, along with all but one in his group—but when Chambers described his offense, Vega couldn’t understand why the charges were so severe. How could he be responsible for all the backpacks when he only carried one? It didn’t make sense, Vega said, and worse, it was unfair. Competitors from all over the world, electrified by "Born to Run", made the pilgrimage to the Tarahumara homeland. But racing couldn’t alleviate the hardships ravaging the Tarahumara themselves. Chambers was impressed; none of his other clients had ever commented on the injustice of the law. He called his colleague and friend Jaime Escuder, who had also been assigned a defendant in the case. Escuder had recently defended a Tarahumara man in his fifties who, they realized, had been in Vega’s brickmaking crew. They lived in the same indigent neighborhood on the edge of Chihuahua. Escuder’s client had been sentenced to eighteen months in federal prison—six months longer than others in his group because he’d had the misfortune of appearing before a different judge. Around the same time, federal defenders in Alpine had represented a pair of Tarahumara teenagers also recruited in Chihuahua. While working a job canning chiles, they were told they could earn twice as much at a pecan orchard near the Rio Grande. When they arrived at the orchard, there were no pecans. Investigators from the federal public defender’s office had seen Tarahumara come through their West Texas offices for five years, as had their colleagues in nearby Las Cruces. Chambers turned to the internet. He read about races that went on for several days and about the ultramarathon that now brought the best long-distance runners to the Sierra Madre. He read about villages that had no electricity or running water and that were full of ex-felons. The news coverage he could find estimated that more than a hundred Tarahumara had been arrested during the previous decade, but unless the defendants had to have a Rarámuri translator, like Escuder’s, their background had probably never come up. The actual number was likely much higher. When he met Vega again, Chambers jokingly asked, “If you could run like that, why didn’t you escape?” Vega said he never could have evaded the agents in their trucks and helicopters. Chambers nodded. There were some things you couldn’t outrun. IN MARCH 2010, a month before Silvino’s narrow escape in New Mexico, the annual Ultra Caballo Blanco had drawn a record number of international participants to Urique Canyon. Competitors from all over the world, electrified by Born to Run, made the pilgrimage to the Tarahumara homeland. But racing couldn’t alleviate the hardships ravaging the Tarahumara themselves. That year, many had shown up to the event starving, walking or hitchhiking from hundreds of miles around, bringing only the clothes on their backs. Urique’s head of tourism watched in tears as Tarahumara runners collapsed. Silvino could only muster twenty-fifth place. Silvino on the cover of Runner’s World Mexico. A few years earlier, the Sinaloa and Juárez cartels had begun escalating their fight for control of billion-dollar fields of marijuana and poppy in the so-called Golden Triangle, where the states of Chihuahua, Sinaloa, and Durango converge in the Sierra. To meet the surging demand for heroin in the United States, they also began seizing additional farmland in order to increase poppy cultivation. Many Tarahumara were forced to grow these crops, their wages docked and their land stolen. By 2010, entire communities had emptied out of the canyons, and some ten thousand had fled to the city of Chihuahua, where they were more easily conscripted into smuggling. There, it also became common to see Tarahumara children begging or selling candy and key chains on the streets. For Silvino, new opportunities eventually arose from the attention generated by the book. Organizers across the world sought Tarahumara runners for their races, and those who moved comfortably among chabochi, or outsiders, began receiving regular invitations to race. So, after returning from his aborted drug run, Silvino saw his racing career take off. He finished second in an ultramarathon in Austria, the first of many races in more than half a dozen countries where his expenses were paid and the possible earnings were worth the trip. After successes in Costa Rica and Spain, he landed on the cover of Runner’s World México, in December 2014. He built a small adobe house for his wife and children and another for his parents and siblings, and he fixed up an old truck so he could bring his harvest into the town of Urique to sell. Still, racing never provided a stable income for Silvino—prize money wasn’t guaranteed—and most of the Tarahumara fared far worse. As the cartel war ricocheted from one canyon to the next, Urique became one of the last towns to be engulfed by intense violence. It had once served as an outpost for tourists exploring the natural beauty of the surrounding canyons, which helped keep it relatively tranquil until a Sinaloa boss’s nephew was murdered there, in late 2014. From then on gunfire could routinely be heard in the town and up the canyon. In the days leading up to the 2015 Ultra Caballo Blanco, an eight-hour battle erupted in a village along the planned racecourse. International runners arrived to find armed gangs in the streets of Urique, while local government officials assured the competitors there were no problems. A day before the race, however, Juárez hit men stormed the police station, seizing two officers and a teenager, and American organizers called off the race. Most of the visiting runners, who had come from 23 countries, made their way out under military escort. More than five hundred Tarahumara, Silvino included, resolved to carry on anyway, and the mayor agreed to a version that cut out the downriver loop, where the major shoot-out had occurred. A few months later, Sinaloa won control of the area—nearly a dozen planes flew out of the town of Urique in one day with the remaining Juárez fighters—but conditions worsened. With the Sinaloa in command, land theft and poppy growing increased. Some Tarahumara activists tried to make their plight known, like Irma Chávez Cruz, a 25-year-old mother who was a friend of Silvino’s. Chávez had learned Spanish as a teenager, to serve as an interpreter for her people, then earned a university degree in ecology and gotten elected to local government. She worried about Tarahumara children losing their running traditions, so she regularly put on races in the region, including all-female events called ariweta. She helped organize the largest-ever recorded rarajipari in Chihuahua—Silvino led one of the teams—and together they traveled to Brazil, in October 2015, for the inaugural World Indigenous Games. The next year, Chávez ran in the Boston Marathon (possibly the first Tarahumara woman to do so) and, while there, spoke on a panel about indigenous running traditions. Together with her father, an activist, musician, and poet known as Makawi, she pleaded for government officials in Chihuahua to help prevent drug traffickers from stealing their land and their water. But help never came, and speaking out became risky. According to the Mexico City–based magazine Proceso, at least five indigenous activists were assassinated in 2015 and 2016. In the summer of 2016, drug traffickers moved on the town of Basihuare, near Chávez’s hometown of Rejogochi, stealing the funds from the town’s ejido, a government-supported agriculture cooperative. After razing the corn and bean fields, they planted poppies instead. Mickey Mahaffey, a 64-year-old American, has lived among the Tarahumara for two decades. Last summer, he hired Silvino to help manage a chia cultivation project. That same summer, Silvino landed a job as a manager for a chia cultivation project for 400 pesos (about $20) a day. A fine salary, but it was an experimental crop: a 64-year-old American named Mickey Mahaffey, who had lived among the Tarahumara for two decades and married Silvino’s younger sister, Carmen, struck up a deal to grow eight acres for an energy-bar company based in Richmond, Virginia. Even for a strong farmer like Silvino, who used oxen to plough his fields in Huisuchi, cultivating chia in Urique proved biblical in its afflictions. In the middle of August, Silvino and seven others cleared eight acres of weeds by hand amid a plague of red ants, tarantulas, bees, gnats, flies, scorpions, snakes, floods, and 125-degree heat. It doubled as his race training. Silvino couldn’t compete in the U.S. because of his arrest record, but he still needed to race to remain financially free of the cartels, so he often stuck to races closer to home, like the upcoming ultramarathon in Cerocahui, which included a four-thousand-foot ascent up a road out of Urique. Two runners in their mid-twenties were planning to challenge him, and the prize for winning was significant: 14,000 pesos ($765), which, coincidentally, was nearly the going rate for running drugs across the border. IF CIRCUMSTANCES ONCE again drove Silvino to carry another drug load, he’d be risking a potentially lengthy prison term. Chambers had seen many of these harsh sentences handed out, including to drug runners who were essentially forced into smuggling. Still, of the dozens and dozens of clients he’d defended, it was Vega, and the plight of the Tarahumara, that stuck with him. Chambers grew up on the border. His late paternal grandfather, Boyd, was a rancher on the Sierra Vieja, a small mountain range that locals call the Candelaria Rimrock, after the nearest town. Roughly forty miles northwest of Big Bend Ranch State Park, it is a place of extremes, a dry, barren land that is only ever hot or cold. It’s untamable, though his family certainly tried. Like the Tarahumara, the Chambers clan was inexorably tied to their land. Growing up, his love for the ranch—bouncing over Capote Creek in his grandfather’s truck, watching the men ride out with the cattle while mounted on his own pony—was matched by his admiration for the tough people who worked it. Chambers remembers his grandfather watching the Weather Channel regularly, hoping for rain. To help keep them on the ranch, his grandmother Johnnie earned a teaching degree from Sul Ross State University in her forties, and she ran the two-room schoolhouse in Candelaria for 25 years. His grandfather served as a Presidio County commissioner and was often asked to resolve border disputes privately. Back then, nationality didn’t matter as much; people were simply trying to make ends meet on both sides of the Rio Grande. When I visited Chambers at his office in January, his desk was makeshift: two long folding tables down the hall from a few other lawyers in a one-story brick building on the main street. The white stucco walls were empty; his diplomas were stored at his fiancée’s house. There was little to give away his roots. Then again, he spent much of his life severed from them. The prize for winning was significant: 14,000 pesos ($765), which, coincidentally, was nearly the going rate for running drugs across the border. In late 1991, when Chambers was four, his father was arrested in the largest drug bust on record in West Texas. Federal and state drug enforcement agents arrested Glyn Robert Chambers and the popular sheriff of Presidio County, Rick Thompson, after an informant tipped them off to a red horse trailer containing 2,400 pounds of cocaine on the fairgrounds in Marfa. It was big news, from the Big Bend Sentinel (“The Marfa Coke Bust,” it blared) all the way to the New York Times. There was no trial. They both pleaded guilty and were sentenced to life in prison. (Robert Chambers was released in 2005 after serving 13 years. Thompson is scheduled to get out April 14, 2018.) Chambers remembers law enforcement coming to his house after his father had been arrested, though he was too young to comprehend the reason. He grew up believing he’d never see him again outside of prison. His mother, Christine, didn’t want to stay in Alpine because of the publicity. They moved up and down the Interstate 35 corridor so often that Chambers lost count of the number of schools he attended. It may have been thirty. When he was thirteen, they went to live with his mother’s family, in Abilene. There was no sewer connection in their trailer, and electricity came from an extension cord that stretched from his grandparents’ house. Soon after, his mother was arrested for possession with intent to distribute methamphetamine. In the years ahead, she cycled in and out of prison for similar charges. A pair of uncles on his mom’s side also went to prison for drug offenses, and so did a paternal uncle. He became frustrated with the legal system, which he felt was too focused on punishing his family members for their addictions rather than helping them. After going to law school, in northwest Indiana, he thought he’d never return to West Texas, but it was Liz Rogers who persuaded him to come back. Rogers also came from a ranching family, and she found her calling with the federal defenders. In time, the backpackers she’d come to represent were known to ask for her by name. Chambers never forgot that first time he accompanied Rogers to jail as an intern. Her caseload was so large she had to meet with up to nine clients at a time, but she patiently explained to each one how their case would unfold and made them all laugh. He knew he’d never be able to hold an audience like that, but he realized then that this work was what he wanted to do.     Helping clients like Vega affirmed his decision, though it also generated no shortage of heartbreak. Six months after Vega’s case landed on Chambers’s desk, he managed to beat the meth rap. But Vega pleaded guilty to the marijuana charge; there was no other recourse. Vega didn’t know the men who’d recruited him, which is typical in backpacker cases, so they didn’t have any information to offer prosecutors in exchange for a shorter sentence. As a result, Vega—performing the lowest, most expendable role in the drug trade—carried the burden himself. Chambers told Vega that it was a good deal, and it helped when the Federal Bureau of Prisons sent back a recommendation of 46 months instead of 60. Even still, looking at the slight, dark-haired, shackled Vega, his anger bubbled up. Chambers thought about how Vega wouldn’t be there for his two sons as they grew into their teens. He knew what an absence like that could do to a family. A month later, Chambers stood next to Vega again—this time in an El Paso courtroom—for a second and final hearing on his slightly improved sentence. In Spanish, the judge ran through the conditions of the imprisonment twice so Vega could understand. Then the judge asked Vega if he had anything to add. He did. He wanted to thank his lawyer for helping him. For Chambers, it was one of the saddest days of his life. By 2010, entire communities had emptied out of the canyons, and some ten thousand had fled to the city of Chihuahua, where they were more easily conscripted into smuggling. A VIEW OF URIQUE CANYON. WITH VEGA’S CASE resolved, Chambers moved on. There were many others to get to, almost too many to keep up with. When I stopped by his office one afternoon to see if he would visit Candelaria with me, he declined. He told me he was too busy with his caseload to make the three-hour trip. I still wanted to see the town where he had spent time as a boy-—where many backpackers make their crossing today—so instead, I went with Rogers. We drove west to Marfa before hooking southwest through the Chinati Mountains. Wherever I looked, in Alpine and Marfa and later Presidio, I saw makeshift villages of turnkey houses, the whitewashed barracks of Border Patrol. Rogers pulled off on Farm-to-Market Road 2810, better known as Pinto Canyon Road, where the asphalt ended. The next 21 miles were unpaved. The wide, grassy highlands behind us appeared lush compared with the volcanic landscape ahead: canyons and mesas, haystack buttes and dry arroyos, a psychedelic moonscape with no end in sight, where the only color came from the sky. I thought about Silvino, and I told Rogers about his case. She shook her head in wonder. Had he been arrested the second time in New Mexico, she said, he would have faced a mandatory five years in prison. “There has to be a better way to deal with this,” she said. “When you’re desperate, you’ll do anything. A little time in the Western District of Texas jail isn’t going to keep you from trying to feed your family.” At the bottom of the canyon road, the asphalt resumed at a desolate village called Ruidosa. It was twelve miles north to Candelaria, where you could stand in the middle of town and see all of it: ramshackle trailers and a few adobe houses; Johnnie Chambers’s empty schoolhouse; an abandoned church and a corrugated-metal cotton gin. We hadn’t seen another car in two hours. Candelaria was well on its way to becoming a ghost town. We drove up a small bluff, and Rogers led me to the grave of Boyd Chambers. His black-granite headstone outshone rows of wooden crosses. Mounds of melon-size rocks blanketed every grave. “He made a living in one of the harshest lands on the continent,” Rogers said. She sometimes joked with Chambers that he didn’t know where his grandfather was buried, but he did. He just didn’t like coming here, and I could see why. It was a place people were trying to leave—to run from—not where you go to make something of yourself. He’d told me that sometimes he felt fated to stay in West Texas, and yet he often felt apart from it. Rogers pointed to the barely visible Rio Grande just under a mile beyond, and San Antonio del Bravo farther still. This was the most common drug crossing in her cases, she said. In fact, Vega had come this way. After crossing the river here, backpackers hike past the old Chambers ranch to the top of the Sierra Vieja, where they look for their U.S. 90 pickup. It was at least forty miles through the driest landscape I’d ever seen. The only liquids to be found were two cans of Lone Star and three cans of Bud Light that had been left for Boyd at his headstone. In the distance, Rogers noticed a cloud of black smoke rising downriver. It turned out to be people burning salt cedar, an invasive species that saps water from the earth. They were more optimistic souls in a long line of people who have tried, often futilely, to farm the floodplain. “Imagine walking this with forty-four pounds on your back,” she said, not counting food and water. “The Tarahumara would know how to survive this. They’re some of the toughest people in the world.” Of course, drug traffickers also know this. Last summer, according to a courtroom interpreter, one witness in a backpacker trial in Pecos said that smugglers in Ojinaga told him they only wanted to work with Tarahumara, because of their strength and endurance. Puro Tarahumara de ahora en adelante.  IT WAS STILL dark when Silvino woke two hours before the big race in Cerocahui last October. His stomach was roiling. He hadn’t been feeling well and had visited a hospital the day before. He considered skipping the race, which was 37 miles, but the next event was four months away. He couldn’t count on his corn harvest to yield enough food for his family, and his chia project was still unpredictable. He had to run. It was the eighth-annual ultramarathon here, and 120 runners, mostly Tarahumara, were going to set off from its plaza. They had come from as far away as Chihuahua, riding two buses for eleven hours combined. As Silvino left the San Isidro Lodge, where he had stayed the night, he glanced over at six mangy dogs and cats sleeping next to the embers of a nearby campfire. He looked up at the stars and thought about curses, as older Tarahumara runners tend to do before a race. He had grown up on the ancient tales of men who sprinkled bone dust on the course the night before, thought to induce fatigue in your competitors. He laughed at the memory of a rarajipari when an opposing team cast a spell on his team. His teammates became ill; he’d been the only one not stricken. He didn’t believe in spells, but Silvino felt the pressure of what he’d come to do—not just for his own survival but for the survival of his people. The cartels were not letting up. Two weeks earlier, sicarios, or hit men, had stopped in Rejogochi to ask for Chávez, the young activist, and her father, Makawi. After drug traffickers had taken over the ejido in Basihuare, Makawi had given an interview to a newspaper in Chihuahua, describing the situation and the growing recruitment of Tarahumara youth into organized crime. In August 2016, Chávez had decried the work of the cartels in downtown Chihuahua on the International Day of the World’s Indigenous Peoples before a crowd of several thousand. Makawi had also met with the wives of those who, like Sebastian Vega, were in prison in the U.S. Word was spreading that the sicarios wanted to “eliminate” the two. It was a twenty-minute drive downhill to the square, which Silvino would be running back up for the first leg of the race: these six miles were a steep climb of 1,500 feet. Nobody was warming up when he arrived; the Tarahumara don’t stretch. Silvino wore athletic gear and blue-and-yellow Asics—the trails were too slippery, the roads too hard, for huaraches. The female racers wore their everyday clothes: skirts full of reds, yellows, pinks, and blues, and matching head scarves to block the sun. It was cool now, but the temperature would climb into the 70s.    Ten minutes after six, the runners approached the starting line, adjacent to the three-hundred-year-old red-earthen, yellow-domed Jesuit church, and took off. The darkness lifted just beyond the otherwise dreary concrete plaza, revealing the fertile valley that gives Cerocahui its name: “between two mountains.” The slope up the mountainside was rocky and dusty, the soil eroded from years of logging and grazing. When they neared the San Isidro Lodge, Silvino was in fourth but still in range of the leaders. He passed the now extinguished fire pit and its dogs and cats, a fenced-in flock of garrulous turkeys, and local government officials eating breakfast inside the lodge’s small gazebo. From there, the runners followed white arrows spray-painted on the ground into a forest of piñon pine, juniper, and small oak trees. Sunlight broke through the slim canopy. The thick old-growth trees had been chopped down long ago and sent to the sawmills of nearby Bahuichivo. Silvino remembered the women in Huisuchi who used to weave baskets out of the pine needles. Silvino running the Cerocahui ultramarathon, in Urique Canyon, in October 2016. Silvino emerged from the forest onto a road—really a collection of rocks and dirt. Forty years ago, engineers had erected this road on top of an ancient Tarahumara foot trail. There were hairpin turns where the drop-off was thousands of feet, and he passed several roadside memorials. Here, Urique’s mayor and its public-works director had driven off the cliff almost four years ago. The newspapers alleged mechanical failure, but people heard otherwise: it was said that traffickers had murdered them in the middle of the night and pushed their car into the canyon. As Silvino continued to ascend, the only sounds were the buzz of white-eared hummingbirds and the musical trills of canyon and rock wrens. At 7:48, Silvino spotted the worn arrow that directed runners to take the footpath to the scenic overlook called El Mirador del Cerro del Gallego. The explorer Lumholtz had surveyed Urique from up here more than a century ago. It was around the twelve-mile mark. He glanced over his right shoulder at the river that snaked through the canyon of the same name. Urique had an anthropomorphic quality from here: the peaks on either side of the river looked like heads, with an evergreen blanket sloped across their chests and legs. He scrambled down a cliff-side trail so narrow that only one person could traverse it at a time. Up here, he realized, right before the 2008 Semana Santa celebrations, assassins from the Sinaloa cartel had kidnapped around a dozen people from Urique—the chief of police, other officers, government officials—and beheaded all but two, whom they sent back to town, stripped naked and hands tied, to tell the story. Silvino picked up speed as the trail descended toward the village of Porochi. He hadn’t eaten anything, not even the pocket-size bean burritos and salsa he normally ran with. He was starting to feel better—the steep climbs were behind him—and though he wouldn’t be able to catch the leader, he thought he could finish second or third. He recalled his 62-mile ultramarathon victory in Costa Rica, where he’d felt he might collapse. “I’m fighting for money,” he’d told himself. “If I don’t take the risk during a race, then I don’t get any reward.” Silvino felt the pressure of what he’d come to do—not just for his own survival but for the survival of his people. He passed fields with corn stalks as tall as the cabins beside them, and a few loose cows and goats. Then, with the path hugging a creek, he entered tiny Porochi. At the aid station, he declined water and collected a paper bracelet to confirm he had passed. He was in third place. The squat white ejido headquarters proclaimed Porochi as the Tierra de Corredores, or the “Land of Runners.” It was the halfway point. Silvino followed the creek, skirting red-and-white fields of poppy. The course turned toward Cerocahui on a footpath built by drug traffickers to carry out their crops. Runners would have to reach the plaza, grab another bracelet, and then double back to the edge of town before returning. Silvino came into town only five minutes behind second place. A pair of federal police trucks rolled through with machine gunners standing in the bed, black scarves covering the bottom half of their faces. At the square, a dozen bedraggled municipal police, a few seemingly too young to grow facial hair, loitered with unloaded AK-47s—goat’s horns, they called them. At 10:42, the first runner appeared on the cobblestone alley leading to the finish. Between sips of Guinness, the race organizer announced the winner’s name, hometown, and time. Volunteers were on hand to offer cheese sandwiches, bananas, and oranges. He crossed the finish line, accepted a sandwich, sat on a stone wall, and barely stirred for photographs with local officials. The smell of charcoal-grilled chicken filled the air. Thirty minutes later, the second finisher arrived, and Silvino three minutes after him. There was little shade, and he dropped down on a set of steps next to four old campesinos. A pair of feral dogs dozed near Silvino’s feet. He ate a sandwich and drank a bottle of Coca-Cola. For finishing third, Silvino earned 8,000 pesos, enough to remain free of the cartels, at least for a while longer. Early the next morning, with only a little pain in his right leg, Silvino drove in a low gear down the canyon to Urique, listening to traditional Tarahumara folk music from a USB stick connected to the CD player. Its wistful melody is reserved for joyous occasions, when Tarahumara dance to its repetitive interplay of violin and guitar. Three paper bracelets from the race still hung around his left wrist. He was back in the chia fields after breakfast. Ryan Goldberg is a freelance journalist based in New York. Copyright © Texas Monthly 2017. All rights reserved. MENU THEDRUG RUNNERS PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAVID RAMOS The Tarahumara of northern Mexico became famous for their ability to run incredibly long distances. In recent years, cartels have exploited their talents by forcing them to ferry drugs into the U.S. Now, with their land ravaged by violence, they’re running for their lives. JULY 2017 | by RYAN GOLDBERG Photographs by David Ramos IT WAS A HALF hour after midnight and Silvino Cubesare Quimare was approaching the ghost town of Separ, in southwest New Mexico. Tall and lithe, his skin browned from years of laboring under the desert sun, he strode through the darkness. Strapped to his back were two homespun burlap packs, one filled with 45 pounds of marijuana bricks and the other with enough burritos and gallon jugs of water to survive another week in the wilderness. With him were five cousins and a nephew, each shouldering a similar load. They trudged silently past the scars of an old copper mining trail, long-gone railroad tracks and trading posts that once upon a time exchanged men, minerals, and equipment across the border to Chihuahua. Up ahead, they saw the lights of a highway and knew they were within a dozen miles of their drop-off. They’d reach it before daybreak. It was April 2, 2010, and over five days they had traveled roughly five hundred miles from their village of Huisuchi, in the remote Sierra Madre mountains of northern Mexico. For months, Huisuchi had been cursed with drought. Though clouds had gathered off and on over the villagers’ homes—dark, billowing masses that overshadowed their huts among the fields of corn—it had not rained. The villagers had danced, and their children had tossed handfuls of water toward the sky, asking their god Onorúame for help, but relief had not come. By early spring their corn was burned on the stalk. Rather than face starvation, Silvino’s cousins had approached him with an idea: they could go on a drug-running mission across the border. It was a quick-paying job, and it would help their village. “You’re strong and you know the way,” they pleaded. “You’ve done this before.” Silvino, a farmer with four children, knew the canyons the way urban dwellers know city streets: every rock, cactus, and river bend was a sign. In fact, Silvino had carried a mochila, as the narcos called it, three times before. The reasons for this were, in some ways, fated. His people, an indigenous tribe of roughly 70,000 known as the Tarahumara, had originated on the lush plains east of the mountains. But beginning in the sixteenth century the tribe fled Spanish invaders, Jesuit missionaries, and Mexican settlers—and their fatal diseases, forced labor, and attempted conversions—retreating into the Sierra Madre’s forbidding landscape. They settled what would come to be known as the Sierra Tarahumara, an expansive network of canyons that are, at some points, deeper than the Grand Canyon, dropping 6,140 feet through three ecosystems. The most famous section, covered with lichen, is the color of oxidized copper. When the Norwegian explorer Carl Lumholtz stopped at the edge of one of these canyons, Urique, in the late nineteenth century, he couldn’t imagine anyone living below. In his book on his travels through the Sierra Madre mountains, Unknown Mexico, he recounts that when the Jesuits first arrived and asked the Tarahumara about the canyon’s depth, they replied, “Only the birds know.” For centuries the Tarahumara got by as subsistence farmers. Their huts clung to the granite slopes and crevices of the canyons, which are connected by a vast system of narrow footpaths. In these rugged gorges, they developed a unique running style that eventually brought them fame. Either barefoot or in sandals (called huaraches) made from old tire treads and goat hide, they were able to traverse seemingly super-human distances. “Tarahumara” is a Spanish corruption of the tribe’s name, Rarámuri, meaning “ones with light feet” or “foot runners.” Maria Juana Ramirez at the Cerocahui ultramarathon (37 miles) in Urique Canyon in October 2016. Traditionally they ran as a form of religious ritual, such as to celebrate the harvest, in two-team races called rarajipari. For up to 24 hours—and sometimes longer—they kicked a small wooden ball across a rocky trail, and by the end of the race, teams often had only a few men left standing. But besides stamina, rarajipari demanded selflessness and strategy. In the days leading up to the race, competitors ground corn for an energy drink called pinole (and set aside a fermented version as their post-race celebratory beer, tesgüino). The afternoon before, the two teams walked the course, quarreling over its design and the number of laps. During the race, the slower runners tended to set the early pace, while the closers bided their time. Spectators wagered clothes, goats, or money on the outcome and lit the way at night with pine-resin torches. The tribe’s runners had never ventured far from home and remained largely unknown until 1993, when an opportunistic American photographer named Rick Fisher brought several members, including a 55-year-old grandfather and a 40-something goat farmer, to an old Colorado mining town called Leadville to enter its 100-mile ultramarathon. The race was part of the budding sport of extreme long-distance trail running, in which race lengths range from slightly longer than the standard 26.2-mile marathon to more than 150 miles. Wearing sandals and swigging beers at the final aid station before the finish, the Tarahumara runners captured first, second, and fifth place and left behind hundreds of mesmerized competitors and fans. Fisher struck deals with sponsors; he paid his runners with bags of corn and beans. When he returned with seven new competitors in 1994, they dominated the race again. The American ultramarathoner Micah True got to know some of the Tarahumara runners in Leadville, and he was so changed by the experience that he later moved to the Sierra Madre. But by the time he arrived, what he found was troubling: because of years of drought, famine, and encroaching cartel violence, in some areas the tribe’s running traditions were almost entirely dormant. Meanwhile, as ultramarathons surged in popularity, American runners began crushing previously held records. True wondered how they would fare against the Tarahumara, and he sought to revitalize these local traditions. In 2006, he persuaded Scott Jurek, the top American, to travel to Urique Canyon for a trail race he was organizing that is now known as the Ultra Caballo Blanco. He enticed locals to enter by promising food vouchers to anyone who finished. He also enlisted the two best Tarahumara runners: Silvino, who was 28 at the time, and his younger cousin Arnulfo Quimare Qui. Silvino, a farmer with four children, knew the canyons the way urban dwellers know city streets: every rock, cactus, and river bend was a sign. He’d run rarajipari as a boy, and, per Tarahumara tradition, gambled on the race from an early age, winning soap, pens, and sometimes even a chicken. Running was in his blood. His mother had been a running champion in her day, and one of her sisters was the mother of Arnulfo, his greatest competitor. At the Caballo Blanco, both Silvino and Arnulfo proved themselves, and though Jurek passed Silvino near the end of the 47 miles, he couldn’t catch Arnulfo.  The journalist Christopher McDougall chronicled the race, and his ensuing book—Born to Run: A Hidden Tribe, Superathletes, and the Greatest Race the World Has Never Seen—became an international sensation, igniting a global running craze. He attributed part of the Tarahumara’s success to their minimal footwear; they ran with a lightness unfamiliar to American runners, landing on the midpoint of their foot instead of the heel. International runners and film crews descended on the Sierra Tarahumara. Multinational corporations seized the merchandising opportunities, and soon, people all over the world were wearing barefoot-style shoes. It seemed that everyone profited except the Tarahumara. Mexican cartels, meanwhile, recognized an opportunity for a different sort of international commerce. Though the Tarahumara largely kept to themselves, poverty and hunger made them targets for narcos looking for mules willing to make the demanding trek to designated drug drop-off points in New Mexico, Arizona, and Texas. Cartel recruiters trolled the gas stations and plazas of small Mexican towns. They bought blue jeans for those wearing traditional loincloths and paired them with guides to lead them to the border at night. In the Tarahumara, the cartels found literal drug runners, who not only could cover incredible distances but were desperate enough to do it.  Silvino Cubesare Quimare in the fields near the town of Urique. Silvino, with his farmland afflicted by unrelenting drought, was one of the desperate ones, so he signed on to tote drugs. Still, he got paid only if he successfully completed his mission. His first time, in 2005, he did just that, tossing his mochila into the back of a truck on a highway near El Paso. The second time, he completed his drop at a fancy hotel outside Las Cruces, New Mexico. The third time, though, in February 2007, Border Patrol agents found him and two others hiding in creosote bushes one hundred miles west of Las Cruces, with three backpacks that totaled 194 pounds. He was arrested and sentenced to eight months. And so when Micah True hosted the second Caballo Blanco, Silvino couldn’t make the race; he was sitting in a New Mexico prison. After his release, it took Silvino two months to get home. Immigrations and Customs Enforcement agents left him in Juárez without enough money for a bus ticket home. He found a friend to front him enough to get to Janos, the first town on his route back. Once there, he picked chiles to earn the bus fare farther south to Chihuahua City, where he finally cobbled together the fare to Huisuchi by making cheese at a quesería. Silvino swore he would never run drugs again, but by 2010, there was still not enough food to eat. His wife, Hilda, begged him not to go, but he felt he had no choice. He and his cousins would be paid 15,000 pesos ($825) apiece. In one week, he could make what usually took three months of labor in the Sierra—and there was little work. “A mí me vale,” Silvino told his wife. I think it’s worth it. Now here he was, with six members of his own family—nearly a year after Born to Run had become an international best seller—striding through the dark up the boot heel of New Mexico. During the day, they slept beneath frayed creosote bushes, concealing their bags nearby, and at night they trudged north toward the freeway, avoiding rattlesnakes, coyotes, and most of all, la migra, the Border Patrol. They were close now, a few hours from their destination. Then, all at once, they saw the spotlights. The Border Patrol had found them. Silvino flung his bags into the sand and began to run. Not again, he thought. He feared what might happen to his family if he went back to federal prison. An agent on a dirt bike tore after him as the others scattered. Silvino felt the adrenaline course through him, and he told himself to escape to the mountains they’d crossed on their way north. Amid the tall gray peaks and dry basins, he’d be harder to catch. Looking behind him, Silvino could see his nephew Luis flagging, but he couldn’t wait. He zigzagged around scrawny desert saplings, while the shadows cast by the dirt bike’s spotlight darted around him. He moved swiftly. He was conditioned to navigating switchbacks. Muy ligero, he told himself. Light-footed. Soon the sound of the dirt bike faded. He had escaped, but Silvino continued running through the night, slept half of the next day, and then ran through the afternoon and the next night. He crossed abandoned desert valleys on old Apache land with nothing to eat, drinking only dung-infested runoff water. Two days later, he reached Ascensión, close to where they’d picked up the drugs. None of his companions had made it out. He had run one hundred miles. Silvino flung his bags into the sand and began to run. Not again, he thought. He feared what might happen to his family if he went back to federal prison. PINTO CANYON ROAD, NEAR MARFA, TEXAS. PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN DAVIDSON. PAUL CHAMBERS WAS sitting in his Alpine office when he got an email about a new client named Sebastian Vega Genoveva waiting for him in jail. It was March 2015, and the 27-year-old, with sandy-brown hair and a neatly cropped beard, was fresh out of law school. Unlike many of his classmates, he didn’t have to wait long for work. Not in West Texas. Remote and rugged, West Texas, along with much of the southwestern United States, has long been a key drug-smuggling corridor. But in the nineties, as Mexican cartels rose in power relative to their Colombian counterparts—who preferred to traffic through South Florida—West Texas became even more essential. In the past twenty years, there has been a fivefold increase in Border Patrol agents working that stretch of border, up to nearly 20,000. By 2015, the tiny office of the federal public defenders in Alpine was tasked with the second-largest caseload in Texas, behind El Paso. Meanwhile, budget cuts meant the number of lawyers (four) stayed the same. The vast majority of cases were for illegal entry—immigration crimes eclipsed all other federal offenses—but they also saw increased numbers of traffickers. Many of these were caught and processed as so-called backpacker cases: groups of six or more Mexican men arrested in the mountains, each carrying about 45 pounds of marijuana. Unable to afford lawyers, each defendant was assigned one by the court. Federal public defenders were typically appointed the first defendant, and private attorneys, like Chambers, were tasked with the rest. Scanning his new client’s arrest report, Chambers expected the details to coalesce into the usual pattern, but he noticed an anomaly. Scanning his new client’s arrest report, Chambers expected the details to coalesce into the usual pattern, but he noticed an anomaly. When Border Patrol agents arrested this group of six and weighed the marijuana bricks—all 256 pounds—they realized that one felt different. Unwrapping it, they discovered a plastic container with a pound of methamphetamine inside. In backpacker cases, each defendant is on the hook for the entire load, not merely his own. Chambers dug out the sentencing guidelines: a scant .11 pounds of meth would double their potential sentences, from five to ten years. He dreaded telling his client. The next day, he drove two hours with Liz Rogers, a thirty-year former federal defender known for pulling out long-shot victories, to the West Texas Detention Facility, in Sierra Blanca, to see Vega. Rogers, a family friend, was now a private attorney and had also been assigned a member of the group. When Chambers was still in law school, in 2012, Rogers had helped introduce him to the federal courts that were handling the influx of people and drugs coming across the border. He accompanied her to court as an intern. He’d expected to see one person on trial. Instead, groups of up to two dozen Mexican nationals at a time, arrested for smuggling drugs or illegal entry, were marched in front of the judge throughout the day. Any other way, Chambers learned, and the courthouse would be backed up for years. That summer, he saw around four hundred cases come through the Alpine office, and within a few years its annual caseload had more than doubled. Chambers returned to school with one of Rogers’s mantras ringing in his ears: “procedural due process,” as opposed to actual due process. In one of his ethics courses, he told the class that what they were learning was a fantasy. “Well, that may happen there,” the professor responded, “but that’s not the way it’s supposed to happen.” When Chambers arrived at the detention facility, the 39-year-old Vega stood up to greet his lawyer. The six-foot-two Chambers towered over him by more than a foot. At first, Vega didn’t seem to understand what Chambers was saying through his translator. Finally, after a few hours, Vega asked the translator if she could speak more slowly. He explained that Spanish was his second language. Vega, it turned out, was a Tarahumara. Paul Chambers outside his Alpine law office on June 22, 2017. PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN DAVIDSON Vega and his family had fled the canyons to find work in Chihuahua, and though he got a job as a brickmaker, it barely sustained them. Soon he was recruited to run drugs into Texas. He’d hoped that once there he could stay a short time and work—in the Permian Basin oil fields, perhaps—and then return home with money for his wife and two sons. But on the afternoon of March 6, Border Patrol agents found him and five others sleeping in the brush west of Marfa. After walking for ten days in the harsh borderland, their guide had abandoned them that morning. As Chambers listened, he was struck by Vega’s guilelessness. Vega readily told him what had happened—as he did to the agents who arrested him, along with all but one in his group—but when Chambers described his offense, Vega couldn’t understand why the charges were so severe. How could he be responsible for all the backpacks when he only carried one? It didn’t make sense, Vega said, and worse, it was unfair. Competitors from all over the world, electrified by "Born to Run", made the pilgrimage to the Tarahumara homeland. But racing couldn’t alleviate the hardships ravaging the Tarahumara themselves. Chambers was impressed; none of his other clients had ever commented on the injustice of the law. He called his colleague and friend Jaime Escuder, who had also been assigned a defendant in the case. Escuder had recently defended a Tarahumara man in his fifties who, they realized, had been in Vega’s brickmaking crew. They lived in the same indigent neighborhood on the edge of Chihuahua. Escuder’s client had been sentenced to eighteen months in federal prison—six months longer than others in his group because he’d had the misfortune of appearing before a different judge. Around the same time, federal defenders in Alpine had represented a pair of Tarahumara teenagers also recruited in Chihuahua. While working a job canning chiles, they were told they could earn twice as much at a pecan orchard near the Rio Grande. When they arrived at the orchard, there were no pecans. Investigators from the federal public defender’s office had seen Tarahumara come through their West Texas offices for five years, as had their colleagues in nearby Las Cruces. Chambers turned to the internet. He read about races that went on for several days and about the ultramarathon that now brought the best long-distance runners to the Sierra Madre. He read about villages that had no electricity or running water and that were full of ex-felons. The news coverage he could find estimated that more than a hundred Tarahumara had been arrested during the previous decade, but unless the defendants had to have a Rarámuri translator, like Escuder’s, their background had probably never come up. The actual number was likely much higher. When he met Vega again, Chambers jokingly asked, “If you could run like that, why didn’t you escape?” Vega said he never could have evaded the agents in their trucks and helicopters. Chambers nodded. There were some things you couldn’t outrun. IN MARCH 2010, a month before Silvino’s narrow escape in New Mexico, the annual Ultra Caballo Blanco had drawn a record number of international participants to Urique Canyon. Competitors from all over the world, electrified by Born to Run, made the pilgrimage to the Tarahumara homeland. But racing couldn’t alleviate the hardships ravaging the Tarahumara themselves. That year, many had shown up to the event starving, walking or hitchhiking from hundreds of miles around, bringing only the clothes on their backs. Urique’s head of tourism watched in tears as Tarahumara runners collapsed. Silvino could only muster twenty-fifth place. Silvino on the cover of Runner’s World Mexico. A few years earlier, the Sinaloa and Juárez cartels had begun escalating their fight for control of billion-dollar fields of marijuana and poppy in the so-called Golden Triangle, where the states of Chihuahua, Sinaloa, and Durango converge in the Sierra. To meet the surging demand for heroin in the United States, they also began seizing additional farmland in order to increase poppy cultivation. Many Tarahumara were forced to grow these crops, their wages docked and their land stolen. By 2010, entire communities had emptied out of the canyons, and some ten thousand had fled to the city of Chihuahua, where they were more easily conscripted into smuggling. There, it also became common to see Tarahumara children begging or selling candy and key chains on the streets. For Silvino, new opportunities eventually arose from the attention generated by the book. Organizers across the world sought Tarahumara runners for their races, and those who moved comfortably among chabochi, or outsiders, began receiving regular invitations to race. So, after returning from his aborted drug run, Silvino saw his racing career take off. He finished second in an ultramarathon in Austria, the first of many races in more than half a dozen countries where his expenses were paid and the possible earnings were worth the trip. After successes in Costa Rica and Spain, he landed on the cover of Runner’s World México, in December 2014. He built a small adobe house for his wife and children and another for his parents and siblings, and he fixed up an old truck so he could bring his harvest into the town of Urique to sell. Still, racing never provided a stable income for Silvino—prize money wasn’t guaranteed—and most of the Tarahumara fared far worse. As the cartel war ricocheted from one canyon to the next, Urique became one of the last towns to be engulfed by intense violence. It had once served as an outpost for tourists exploring the natural beauty of the surrounding canyons, which helped keep it relatively tranquil until a Sinaloa boss’s nephew was murdered there, in late 2014. From then on gunfire could routinely be heard in the town and up the canyon. In the days leading up to the 2015 Ultra Caballo Blanco, an eight-hour battle erupted in a village along the planned racecourse. International runners arrived to find armed gangs in the streets of Urique, while local government officials assured the competitors there were no problems. A day before the race, however, Juárez hit men stormed the police station, seizing two officers and a teenager, and American organizers called off the race. Most of the visiting runners, who had come from 23 countries, made their way out under military escort. More than five hundred Tarahumara, Silvino included, resolved to carry on anyway, and the mayor agreed to a version that cut out the downriver loop, where the major shoot-out had occurred. A few months later, Sinaloa won control of the area—nearly a dozen planes flew out of the town of Urique in one day with the remaining Juárez fighters—but conditions worsened. With the Sinaloa in command, land theft and poppy growing increased. Some Tarahumara activists tried to make their plight known, like Irma Chávez Cruz, a 25-year-old mother who was a friend of Silvino’s. Chávez had learned Spanish as a teenager, to serve as an interpreter for her people, then earned a university degree in ecology and gotten elected to local government. She worried about Tarahumara children losing their running traditions, so she regularly put on races in the region, including all-female events called ariweta. She helped organize the largest-ever recorded rarajipari in Chihuahua—Silvino led one of the teams—and together they traveled to Brazil, in October 2015, for the inaugural World Indigenous Games. The next year, Chávez ran in the Boston Marathon (possibly the first Tarahumara woman to do so) and, while there, spoke on a panel about indigenous running traditions. Together with her father, an activist, musician, and poet known as Makawi, she pleaded for government officials in Chihuahua to help prevent drug traffickers from stealing their land and their water. But help never came, and speaking out became risky. According to the Mexico City–based magazine Proceso, at least five indigenous activists were assassinated in 2015 and 2016. In the summer of 2016, drug traffickers moved on the town of Basihuare, near Chávez’s hometown of Rejogochi, stealing the funds from the town’s ejido, a government-supported agriculture cooperative. After razing the corn and bean fields, they planted poppies instead. Mickey Mahaffey, a 64-year-old American, has lived among the Tarahumara for two decades. Last summer, he hired Silvino to help manage a chia cultivation project. That same summer, Silvino landed a job as a manager for a chia cultivation project for 400 pesos (about $20) a day. A fine salary, but it was an experimental crop: a 64-year-old American named Mickey Mahaffey, who had lived among the Tarahumara for two decades and married Silvino’s younger sister, Carmen, struck up a deal to grow eight acres for an energy-bar company based in Richmond, Virginia. Even for a strong farmer like Silvino, who used oxen to plough his fields in Huisuchi, cultivating chia in Urique proved biblical in its afflictions. In the middle of August, Silvino and seven others cleared eight acres of weeds by hand amid a plague of red ants, tarantulas, bees, gnats, flies, scorpions, snakes, floods, and 125-degree heat. It doubled as his race training. Silvino couldn’t compete in the U.S. because of his arrest record, but he still needed to race to remain financially free of the cartels, so he often stuck to races closer to home, like the upcoming ultramarathon in Cerocahui, which included a four-thousand-foot ascent up a road out of Urique. Two runners in their mid-twenties were planning to challenge him, and the prize for winning was significant: 14,000 pesos ($765), which, coincidentally, was nearly the going rate for running drugs across the border. IF CIRCUMSTANCES ONCE again drove Silvino to carry another drug load, he’d be risking a potentially lengthy prison term. Chambers had seen many of these harsh sentences handed out, including to drug runners who were essentially forced into smuggling. Still, of the dozens and dozens of clients he’d defended, it was Vega, and the plight of the Tarahumara, that stuck with him. Chambers grew up on the border. His late paternal grandfather, Boyd, was a rancher on the Sierra Vieja, a small mountain range that locals call the Candelaria Rimrock, after the nearest town. Roughly forty miles northwest of Big Bend Ranch State Park, it is a place of extremes, a dry, barren land that is only ever hot or cold. It’s untamable, though his family certainly tried. Like the Tarahumara, the Chambers clan was inexorably tied to their land. Growing up, his love for the ranch—bouncing over Capote Creek in his grandfather’s truck, watching the men ride out with the cattle while mounted on his own pony—was matched by his admiration for the tough people who worked it. Chambers remembers his grandfather watching the Weather Channel regularly, hoping for rain. To help keep them on the ranch, his grandmother Johnnie earned a teaching degree from Sul Ross State University in her forties, and she ran the two-room schoolhouse in Candelaria for 25 years. His grandfather served as a Presidio County commissioner and was often asked to resolve border disputes privately. Back then, nationality didn’t matter as much; people were simply trying to make ends meet on both sides of the Rio Grande. When I visited Chambers at his office in January, his desk was makeshift: two long folding tables down the hall from a few other lawyers in a one-story brick building on the main street. The white stucco walls were empty; his diplomas were stored at his fiancée’s house. There was little to give away his roots. Then again, he spent much of his life severed from them. The prize for winning was significant: 14,000 pesos ($765), which, coincidentally, was nearly the going rate for running drugs across the border. In late 1991, when Chambers was four, his father was arrested in the largest drug bust on record in West Texas. Federal and state drug enforcement agents arrested Glyn Robert Chambers and the popular sheriff of Presidio County, Rick Thompson, after an informant tipped them off to a red horse trailer containing 2,400 pounds of cocaine on the fairgrounds in Marfa. It was big news, from the Big Bend Sentinel (“The Marfa Coke Bust,” it blared) all the way to the New York Times. There was no trial. They both pleaded guilty and were sentenced to life in prison. (Robert Chambers was released in 2005 after serving 13 years. Thompson is scheduled to get out April 14, 2018.) Chambers remembers law enforcement coming to his house after his father had been arrested, though he was too young to comprehend the reason. He grew up believing he’d never see him again outside of prison. His mother, Christine, didn’t want to stay in Alpine because of the publicity. They moved up and down the Interstate 35 corridor so often that Chambers lost count of the number of schools he attended. It may have been thirty. When he was thirteen, they went to live with his mother’s family, in Abilene. There was no sewer connection in their trailer, and electricity came from an extension cord that stretched from his grandparents’ house. Soon after, his mother was arrested for possession with intent to distribute methamphetamine. In the years ahead, she cycled in and out of prison for similar charges. A pair of uncles on his mom’s side also went to prison for drug offenses, and so did a paternal uncle. He became frustrated with the legal system, which he felt was too focused on punishing his family members for their addictions rather than helping them. After going to law school, in northwest Indiana, he thought he’d never return to West Texas, but it was Liz Rogers who persuaded him to come back. Rogers also came from a ranching family, and she found her calling with the federal defenders. In time, the backpackers she’d come to represent were known to ask for her by name. Chambers never forgot that first time he accompanied Rogers to jail as an intern. Her caseload was so large she had to meet with up to nine clients at a time, but she patiently explained to each one how their case would unfold and made them all laugh. He knew he’d never be able to hold an audience like that, but he realized then that this work was what he wanted to do.     Helping clients like Vega affirmed his decision, though it also generated no shortage of heartbreak. Six months after Vega’s case landed on Chambers’s desk, he managed to beat the meth rap. But Vega pleaded guilty to the marijuana charge; there was no other recourse. Vega didn’t know the men who’d recruited him, which is typical in backpacker cases, so they didn’t have any information to offer prosecutors in exchange for a shorter sentence. As a result, Vega—performing the lowest, most expendable role in the drug trade—carried the burden himself. Chambers told Vega that it was a good deal, and it helped when the Federal Bureau of Prisons sent back a recommendation of 46 months instead of 60. Even still, looking at the slight, dark-haired, shackled Vega, his anger bubbled up. Chambers thought about how Vega wouldn’t be there for his two sons as they grew into their teens. He knew what an absence like that could do to a family. A month later, Chambers stood next to Vega again—this time in an El Paso courtroom—for a second and final hearing on his slightly improved sentence. In Spanish, the judge ran through the conditions of the imprisonment twice so Vega could understand. Then the judge asked Vega if he had anything to add. He did. He wanted to thank his lawyer for helping him. For Chambers, it was one of the saddest days of his life. By 2010, entire communities had emptied out of the canyons, and some ten thousand had fled to the city of Chihuahua, where they were more easily conscripted into smuggling. A VIEW OF URIQUE CANYON. WITH VEGA’S CASE resolved, Chambers moved on. There were many others to get to, almost too many to keep up with. When I stopped by his office one afternoon to see if he would visit Candelaria with me, he declined. He told me he was too busy with his caseload to make the three-hour trip. I still wanted to see the town where he had spent time as a boy-—where many backpackers make their crossing today—so instead, I went with Rogers. We drove west to Marfa before hooking southwest through the Chinati Mountains. Wherever I looked, in Alpine and Marfa and later Presidio, I saw makeshift villages of turnkey houses, the whitewashed barracks of Border Patrol. Rogers pulled off on Farm-to-Market Road 2810, better known as Pinto Canyon Road, where the asphalt ended. The next 21 miles were unpaved. The wide, grassy highlands behind us appeared lush compared with the volcanic landscape ahead: canyons and mesas, haystack buttes and dry arroyos, a psychedelic moonscape with no end in sight, where the only color came from the sky. I thought about Silvino, and I told Rogers about his case. She shook her head in wonder. Had he been arrested the second time in New Mexico, she said, he would have faced a mandatory five years in prison. “There has to be a better way to deal with this,” she said. “When you’re desperate, you’ll do anything. A little time in the Western District of Texas jail isn’t going to keep you from trying to feed your family.” At the bottom of the canyon road, the asphalt resumed at a desolate village called Ruidosa. It was twelve miles north to Candelaria, where you could stand in the middle of town and see all of it: ramshackle trailers and a few adobe houses; Johnnie Chambers’s empty schoolhouse; an abandoned church and a corrugated-metal cotton gin. We hadn’t seen another car in two hours. Candelaria was well on its way to becoming a ghost town. We drove up a small bluff, and Rogers led me to the grave of Boyd Chambers. His black-granite headstone outshone rows of wooden crosses. Mounds of melon-size rocks blanketed every grave. “He made a living in one of the harshest lands on the continent,” Rogers said. She sometimes joked with Chambers that he didn’t know where his grandfather was buried, but he did. He just didn’t like coming here, and I could see why. It was a place people were trying to leave—to run from—not where you go to make something of yourself. He’d told me that sometimes he felt fated to stay in West Texas, and yet he often felt apart from it. Rogers pointed to the barely visible Rio Grande just under a mile beyond, and San Antonio del Bravo farther still. This was the most common drug crossing in her cases, she said. In fact, Vega had come this way. After crossing the river here, backpackers hike past the old Chambers ranch to the top of the Sierra Vieja, where they look for their U.S. 90 pickup. It was at least forty miles through the driest landscape I’d ever seen. The only liquids to be found were two cans of Lone Star and three cans of Bud Light that had been left for Boyd at his headstone. In the distance, Rogers noticed a cloud of black smoke rising downriver. It turned out to be people burning salt cedar, an invasive species that saps water from the earth. They were more optimistic souls in a long line of people who have tried, often futilely, to farm the floodplain. “Imagine walking this with forty-four pounds on your back,” she said, not counting food and water. “The Tarahumara would know how to survive this. They’re some of the toughest people in the world.” Of course, drug traffickers also know this. Last summer, according to a courtroom interpreter, one witness in a backpacker trial in Pecos said that smugglers in Ojinaga told him they only wanted to work with Tarahumara, because of their strength and endurance. Puro Tarahumara de ahora en adelante.  IT WAS STILL dark when Silvino woke two hours before the big race in Cerocahui last October. His stomach was roiling. He hadn’t been feeling well and had visited a hospital the day before. He considered skipping the race, which was 37 miles, but the next event was four months away. He couldn’t count on his corn harvest to yield enough food for his family, and his chia project was still unpredictable. He had to run. It was the eighth-annual ultramarathon here, and 120 runners, mostly Tarahumara, were going to set off from its plaza. They had come from as far away as Chihuahua, riding two buses for eleven hours combined. As Silvino left the San Isidro Lodge, where he had stayed the night, he glanced over at six mangy dogs and cats sleeping next to the embers of a nearby campfire. He looked up at the stars and thought about curses, as older Tarahumara runners tend to do before a race. He had grown up on the ancient tales of men who sprinkled bone dust on the course the night before, thought to induce fatigue in your competitors. He laughed at the memory of a rarajipari when an opposing team cast a spell on his team. His teammates became ill; he’d been the only one not stricken. He didn’t believe in spells, but Silvino felt the pressure of what he’d come to do—not just for his own survival but for the survival of his people. The cartels were not letting up. Two weeks earlier, sicarios, or hit men, had stopped in Rejogochi to ask for Chávez, the young activist, and her father, Makawi. After drug traffickers had taken over the ejido in Basihuare, Makawi had given an interview to a newspaper in Chihuahua, describing the situation and the growing recruitment of Tarahumara youth into organized crime. In August 2016, Chávez had decried the work of the cartels in downtown Chihuahua on the International Day of the World’s Indigenous Peoples before a crowd of several thousand. Makawi had also met with the wives of those who, like Sebastian Vega, were in prison in the U.S. Word was spreading that the sicarios wanted to “eliminate” the two. It was a twenty-minute drive downhill to the square, which Silvino would be running back up for the first leg of the race: these six miles were a steep climb of 1,500 feet. Nobody was warming up when he arrived; the Tarahumara don’t stretch. Silvino wore athletic gear and blue-and-yellow Asics—the trails were too slippery, the roads too hard, for huaraches. The female racers wore their everyday clothes: skirts full of reds, yellows, pinks, and blues, and matching head scarves to block the sun. It was cool now, but the temperature would climb into the 70s.    Ten minutes after six, the runners approached the starting line, adjacent to the three-hundred-year-old red-earthen, yellow-domed Jesuit church, and took off. The darkness lifted just beyond the otherwise dreary concrete plaza, revealing the fertile valley that gives Cerocahui its name: “between two mountains.” The slope up the mountainside was rocky and dusty, the soil eroded from years of logging and grazing. When they neared the San Isidro Lodge, Silvino was in fourth but still in range of the leaders. He passed the now extinguished fire pit and its dogs and cats, a fenced-in flock of garrulous turkeys, and local government officials eating breakfast inside the lodge’s small gazebo. From there, the runners followed white arrows spray-painted on the ground into a forest of piñon pine, juniper, and small oak trees. Sunlight broke through the slim canopy. The thick old-growth trees had been chopped down long ago and sent to the sawmills of nearby Bahuichivo. Silvino remembered the women in Huisuchi who used to weave baskets out of the pine needles. Silvino running the Cerocahui ultramarathon, in Urique Canyon, in October 2016. Silvino emerged from the forest onto a road—really a collection of rocks and dirt. Forty years ago, engineers had erected this road on top of an ancient Tarahumara foot trail. There were hairpin turns where the drop-off was thousands of feet, and he passed several roadside memorials. Here, Urique’s mayor and its public-works director had driven off the cliff almost four years ago. The newspapers alleged mechanical failure, but people heard otherwise: it was said that traffickers had murdered them in the middle of the night and pushed their car into the canyon. As Silvino continued to ascend, the only sounds were the buzz of white-eared hummingbirds and the musical trills of canyon and rock wrens. At 7:48, Silvino spotted the worn arrow that directed runners to take the footpath to the scenic overlook called El Mirador del Cerro del Gallego. The explorer Lumholtz had surveyed Urique from up here more than a century ago. It was around the twelve-mile mark. He glanced over his right shoulder at the river that snaked through the canyon of the same name. Urique had an anthropomorphic quality from here: the peaks on either side of the river looked like heads, with an evergreen blanket sloped across their chests and legs. He scrambled down a cliff-side trail so narrow that only one person could traverse it at a time. Up here, he realized, right before the 2008 Semana Santa celebrations, assassins from the Sinaloa cartel had kidnapped around a dozen people from Urique—the chief of police, other officers, government officials—and beheaded all but two, whom they sent back to town, stripped naked and hands tied, to tell the story. Silvino picked up speed as the trail descended toward the village of Porochi. He hadn’t eaten anything, not even the pocket-size bean burritos and salsa he normally ran with. He was starting to feel better—the steep climbs were behind him—and though he wouldn’t be able to catch the leader, he thought he could finish second or third. He recalled his 62-mile ultramarathon victory in Costa Rica, where he’d felt he might collapse. “I’m fighting for money,” he’d told himself. “If I don’t take the risk during a race, then I don’t get any reward.” Silvino felt the pressure of what he’d come to do—not just for his own survival but for the survival of his people. He passed fields with corn stalks as tall as the cabins beside them, and a few loose cows and goats. Then, with the path hugging a creek, he entered tiny Porochi. At the aid station, he declined water and collected a paper bracelet to confirm he had passed. He was in third place. The squat white ejido headquarters proclaimed Porochi as the Tierra de Corredores, or the “Land of Runners.” It was the halfway point. Silvino followed the creek, skirting red-and-white fields of poppy. The course turned toward Cerocahui on a footpath built by drug traffickers to carry out their crops. Runners would have to reach the plaza, grab another bracelet, and then double back to the edge of town before returning. Silvino came into town only five minutes behind second place. A pair of federal police trucks rolled through with machine gunners standing in the bed, black scarves covering the bottom half of their faces. At the square, a dozen bedraggled municipal police, a few seemingly too young to grow facial hair, loitered with unloaded AK-47s—goat’s horns, they called them. At 10:42, the first runner appeared on the cobblestone alley leading to the finish. Between sips of Guinness, the race organizer announced the winner’s name, hometown, and time. Volunteers were on hand to offer cheese sandwiches, bananas, and oranges. He crossed the finish line, accepted a sandwich, sat on a stone wall, and barely stirred for photographs with local officials. The smell of charcoal-grilled chicken filled the air. Thirty minutes later, the second finisher arrived, and Silvino three minutes after him. There was little shade, and he dropped down on a set of steps next to four old campesinos. A pair of feral dogs dozed near Silvino’s feet. He ate a sandwich and drank a bottle of Coca-Cola. For finishing third, Silvino earned 8,000 pesos, enough to remain free of the cartels, at least for a while longer. Early the next morning, with only a little pain in his right leg, Silvino drove in a low gear down the canyon to Urique, listening to traditional Tarahumara folk music from a USB stick connected to the CD player. Its wistful melody is reserved for joyous occasions, when Tarahumara dance to its repetitive interplay of violin and guitar. Three paper bracelets from the race still hung around his left wrist. He was back in the chia fields after breakfast. Ryan Goldberg is a freelance journalist based in New York. Copyright © Texas Monthly 2017. All rights reserved. ShareThis Copy and Paste

© 2017 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our user agreement (effective 1/2/2016) and privacy policy (effective 1/2/2016). Your California privacy rights. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with prior written permission of Condé Nast. The New Yorker may earn a portion of sales from products and services that are purchased through links on our site as part of our affiliate partnerships with retailers.
SUBSCRIBE
MENU
GEAR
TRAVEL
FITNESS
ADVENTURE
CULTURE
VIDEO
MAGAZINE
SUBSCRIBE
PODCAST
SEARCH

Patagonia's Big Business of #Resist
Abe Streep
Jul 24, 2017
The iconic brand has long been the conscience of the outdoor industry, forsaking hefty profits to do the right thing. Now the company is going to war against the Trump administration over protections for public land in a bid to become a serious political player—which happens to be very good for sales.

On February 16 of this year, the outdoor industry transformed. This wasn’t due to a first ascent, a remarkable new piece of gear, or some surprise merger of iconic companies. Rather, what happened that morning was the most mundane of modern American rituals: a conference call. Around 15 minutes into the conversation, a 52-year-old businesswoman from Staten Island, New York, declared war on the ruling party of the United States of America.
The call included Utah’s Republican governor, Gary Herbert, the leadership of the Outdoor Industry Association (OIA), and top executives from Patagonia, the North Face, and REI. They had convened to discuss the Utah congressional delegation’s efforts to roll back protections for America’s federally managed public land—­specifically, ­President Obama’s designation of the Bears Ears National Monument, a 1.4-million-acre swath of high desert considered sacred by local tribes. For the outdoor industry, attacks on public land constitute a dire threat, since that land provides the 610-million-acre ballpark for gearmakers’ $887 billion game. Among the Republican establishment, public land has become a primary target. In the party’s 2016 platform, the GOP demanded the transfer of some federally managed land to the states.
Download the Audm app for your iPhone to listen to more longform titles.
The stakes for the conference call may have been high, but expectations were not. Salt Lake City had hosted the industry’s semiannual trade show, Outdoor Retailer, since the mid-1990s, with the event drawing some $45 million to the state each year. That kind of money can buy influence, but within Washington’s halls of power, the outdoor industry had long been seen as a self-licking ice cream cone: easily pleased with itself and unable to withstand even mild heat.
“They don’t like conflict,” one Capitol Hill insider told me in early February. “I don’t think they have the gumption for the fight.” That harsh assessment was widely shared. In the weeks leading up to the call, Peter Metcalf, the founder of Black Diamond, worked behind the scenes to push the OIA to get serious, writing an op-ed in the Salt Lake Tribune suggesting that the group pull its show out of Utah “in disgust” if the state didn’t end its “all-out assault … on America’s best idea.” But it wasn’t the first time that Metcalf had proposed secession. “I think we get a similar letter from Peter every six months,” Utah’s lieutenant governor told a public-radio reporter afterward—a rhetorical pat on the head.
Things took a hard turn when Yvon Chou­i­nard, the 78-year-old iconoclast and ­founder of Patagonia, announced that his company would boycott future shows if Utah didn’t change its stance on Bears Ears. Arc’teryx and Polartec soon followed. On the call with Governor Herbert, the industry was led by Amy Roberts, the executive director of the OIA, who soon turned the floor over to Patagonia CEO Rose Marcario—the ­woman from Staten Island. The industry leaders were demanding that the governor publicly reject his congressional delegation’s calls to gut the Bears Ears protections, and Marcario calmly explained the seriousness of their conviction. “Just on this call right now, the CEOs represent a little more than $5 billion in revenue,” she said, “and it’s rare we come together galvanized in this way. This is not a political issue or a ploy or anything like that. It’s a moral issue for us.” Scott Baxter, the president of the North Face, echoed Marcario, as did Jerry Stritzke of REI. After some 40 minutes, Herbert refused to meet the demand. The industry leaders thanked him, signed off, and started looking for a new home for their $45 million prize.
 patagonia-rose-marcario.jpg
Rose Marcario, CEO of Patagonia. (Spencer Lowell)
The effect was something like a kick from a blinkered horse. Herbert’s office quickly made statements regarding the “offensive” decision and complaining about the industry’s “gross ingratitude.” Colorado governor John Hickenlooper amped up his bid to lure the show to his state by professing his support for public land. (His efforts would eventually be successful.) In Montana, senator Jon Tester said that the industry had sent “a hell of a message.” New Mexico senator Martin Heinrich called it “a juggernaut of economic force.” Neil Kornze, the director of the Bureau of Land Management under President Obama, told me, “It was almost like a phoenix rising.”
The only person, it seemed, who wasn’t impressed was the man in charge of the company that made it happen. A couple of weeks after the call, I traveled to Patagonia’s campus in Ventura, California, a collection of stucco buildings that manages to be understated despite the fact that it is taking over one side of town. Chouinard and I met in a conference room adorned with paintings of Yosemite National Park. He did not exude optimism. “Welllll,” he sighed from his belly before discussing the impending collapse of the American empire, the importance of lentils as a cover crop, his support for California’s withdrawal from the Union, or “those assholes at Forbes magazine,” who had recently labeled him a billionaire.
Billionaire. To Chouinard, that’s borderline libel. For decades he has professed to loathe growth. Still, the hard fact remains that the Responsible Company—the title of Chouinard’s 2012 book—is on track to be a billion-dollar global enterprise within the next couple of years.
When I asked about the industry’s newfound clout, he rubbed his head and let out a short, rueful laugh. “You know,” he said, “it’s a real weenie industry. These people are scared of their own shadow. I mean, it’s really a disappointment.”
In short order, he criticized the fishing industry, the surfing industry, and REI for failing to give enough money to environmental causes. “The whole outdoor industry is just run by a bunch of weenies,” he went on, “And they’re not stepping up. They just suck the life out of outdoor resources and give nothing away.”
He wanted me to know something else. “There’s nobody outside the company that understands what we’re doing here,” he said. “They just don’t understand.”
Almost anyone who has flipped through one of Patagonia’s famous catalogs—which is to say, everyone in the outdoor industry—has come across the company’s mission statement: “Build the best product, cause no unnecessary harm, use business to inspire and implement solutions to the environmental crisis.” People close to Patagonia say that this treasured culture hasn’t changed and that Chouinard talks about the same things in the boardroom today that he did 30 years ago.
But a close examination reveals an enormous recent shift, one that could upend the outdoor industry and have a broad-­reaching impact on American politics and business practices. In his bestselling 2005 book, Let My People Go Surfing, Chouinard wrote about maintaining “a controlled growth rate of about five percent.” Since 2009, a year after Marcario was hired as CFO, ­annual growth climbed to 14 percent, according to Fortune. Patagonia says that revenue and profits have quadrupled over the past ­seven years. In 2016, sales jumped 18 percent, according to the company—more than three times REI’s growth rate. The North Face, meanwhile, declined by 2 percent, to $2.3 billion. Patagonia now controls 9 percent of the outdoor industry’s apparel market, a figure that doesn’t include the company’s massive direct-to-­consumer business. To many competitors, it seems that Chouinard and Marcario have removed the governor that had long restrained the brand’s revenue engine.
To hear Chouinard and Marcario explain it, Patagonia is simply responding to a natural demand for products made by companies with an environmental and social conscience—a well-known preference among millennial consumers. “What we are doing is stealing other companies’ business,” Choui­nard told me in Ventura. “The outdoor industry is not in good shape. You do the right thing, it leads to more business. What am I going to do, say no?”
That struck me as a typical Chouinard answer—incisive, self-effacing, devil-may-care. But Patagonia’s growth is no coincidence. The brand now encompasses a venture-capital fund that supports green startups, a food label, book and film divisions, and, most visibly, a politically active environmental arm that’s picking public fights with the Trump administration, starting with Bears Ears. Those battles are fought on principle, but they also ­directly jolt the bottom line by energizing Patagonia’s fast-growing customer base. This business model goes far beyond 1% for the Planet, the corporate-­giving program Chouinard cofounded in 2002, or earning B Corp certification for meeting high standards for environmental impact, accountability, and transparency. Patagonia has become something like a for-­profit development organization, attempting to inject its ethos into more and more aspects of the global economy. Each of its branches helps expand the brand’s do-gooder image, which in turn attracts new consumers, boosts revenue, and allows the company to push its progressive agenda even further.
“In the end,” says Marcario, a no-­nonsense woman with a quick laugh, “the great brands will be the ones that have vision to face facts square in the eye and take action—radical action.”
When I asked Chouinard what people outside the company don’t understand about Patagonia, he said, “How serious we are about basically saving the planet.”
Of course, such grand ambition requires enormous resources. In the global scheme of things, Patagonia touching the hem of $1 billion essentially elevates it from featherweight to lightweight. For the near future, the company cannot compete with the political influence of, say, the oil and gas industry—a primary opponent in the public-land fight. Continued rapid growth could eventually change that—the company’s investment fund, Tin Shed Ventures, has nearly quadrupled in size since 2013, from $20 million to $75 million. For now, though, Patagonia’s power lies mostly in its ability to revolutionize the outdoor industry—the nascent phoenix, which, at nearly $1 trillion, has the cash and the customers to influence national policy. But it remains to be seen whether other companies in the industry are committed to sustained political activism and are willing to follow the lead of a man prone to calling them out as weenies.
And if Patagonia ends up forging ahead alone, one wonders just how much can be expected of a company that gives its employees every other Friday off to surf.
Patagonia's campus has the feel of a food co-op crossed with a ­liberal-arts col­lege crossed with a surf shop. Its defin­ing elements include a next-­generation gear lab and a day care center. Employees enjoy nothing more than sharing Yvon stories, like the one about him sleeping in the back of an old Honda Element during a recent fishing trip, or the one about him climbing over the fence to the seaside community where he has a home after forgetting the gate code.
But Chouinard no longer does much of the heavy lifting. Marcario came to the company in 2008, following a career in private equity and the tech industry that included a stint as the CFO of Apple offshoot General Magic. After taking a few months to travel around India, she applied to Patagonia with some trepidation, because she had heard “that Yvon hated bankers and finance people.” Over the course of her interviews with him, she questioned Patagonia’s lack of growth. “I remember saying it seemed like the company was super small compared with what it should be,” she says. “He said that it was ‘controlled growth.’ I remember challenging him—saying, Well, maybe it’s just that you’re not fulfilling demand.”
Growth has long been a touchy subject at Patagonia. In 1991, with the country in a recession, Patagonia’s sales were well short of expectations and Chouinard laid off 20 percent of his staff. Afterward, he resolved to avoid debt and pursue only natural growth. “Growth for growth’s sake is not a goal,” says former CEO Kris Tompkins, who still sits on Patagonia’s board. Chouinard and his wife and cofounder, Malinda, Tompkins says, “want a high-quality company based on the criteria they set, and the size it becomes is the size it becomes.”
For decades, Patagonia sought to demonstrate that profitability and environmentalism can go hand in hand—to show a better way by, for example, encouraging fair-trade practices in foreign factories. The company advised Walmart, helping the retail behemoth clean up its supply chain, and worked with Nike to create the Textile Exchange, a nonprofit that encourages more sustainable practices in the apparel industry. Chouinard now believes that he was mistaken in trying to influence publicly traded companies. “I was pretty naive thinking you could do that,” he told me.
Marcario presented an alternative: grow Patagonia into a much bigger brand so that everything it did would have greater impact. She was uniquely qualified to make this argument. In her youth, she was an outspoken progressive activist, arrested during protests on issues like LGBT rights, AIDS, and women’s health. “She understands the need for revolution,” Chouinard has said. But she also understands business. Upon taking the CFO job, she streamlined distribution and shipping, installed industry-standard software, and focused on improving e-commerce. “Doing things that, you know, like, retailers do,” she laughs. During her first year, in 2008, the global economy crashed, but Patagonia—and much of the outdoor industry—didn’t: the company experienced growth in the high single digits. Casey Sheahan, Patagonia’s CEO at the time, told me that this was due to people “aligning themselves tribally” at a time of strife. It was a hint of the opportunity that would come with the rise of Trump.
Sheahan also told me that, at the time he left Patagonia, more than 50 percent of the revenue came from direct-to-­consumer business via Patagonia’s stores and e-­commerce. He suspects that the percentage is bigger today. (The company wouldn’t confirm or deny this.) Selling directly to a consumer, rather than through a third-party retailer like Backcountry.com or REI, ­increases both revenue and influence. According to Joe Flannery, a veteran outdoor-industry marketer and senior VP of technical apparel for Newell Brands, which owns Marmot and Coleman, Patagonia’s direct-to-consumer sales “represents one of the most powerful mechanisms of any brand. When you have that direct interaction, that means the consumer is digesting what you’re saying.”
In 2011, Patagonia ran a full-page ad in The New York Times showing a piece of the company’s apparel below the headline “Don’t Buy This Jacket.” The ad made the case that customers should audit their own consumption, but as The New Yorker ­noted in a 2016 story, “The slogan sounded an ­awful lot like ‘Buy this jacket, not that other one, from the North Face.’” In 2012, the year before Marcario was appointed CEO, Patagonia had rebooted the Footprint Chronicles, an online tool that allows customers to track goods through its supply chain, adding cotton farms, updating it for mobile, and integrating it with its e-commerce site.
“That was a defining moment,” says Flannery. “From the time they did that, track their market share and you’ll see there are clear winners and losers.” His own employer has taken a cue: in 2016, Marmot paid a fortune for a cheeky Super Bowl commercial. This fall the company is beginning an initiative to green its manufacturing practices called TreadLight, which includes a new technology that reduces the use of chemicals and water in the making of rainwear.
 patagonia-work-table_h.jpg
Members of Patagonia’s marketing and environmental-activism teams reviewing monuments threatened by the Trump administration. (Spencer Lowell)
In 2012, Chouinard also started Patagonia Provisions, an environmentally conscious food endeavor that sells wild Alaskan pink salmon, organic grains, and beer made with Kernza, a perennial wheatgrass. In 2013, Marcario launched the company’s venture fund to create companies offering the kinds of things Patagonia both believes in and would like to use, such as water-free textile-­washing machines and bison raised on family ­ranches. To manage the fund, she hired Phil Graves away from the financial-consulting giant Deloitte. He is one of a growing cadre of key players who don’t exactly fit ­Patagonia’s classic dirtbag-climber mold. Others include general counsel Hilary Dessouky, formerly of Levi’s, and public relations director Corley Kenna, who previously was a VP of commu­ni­cations for Ralph Lauren and deputy research director of Hillary Clinton’s 2008 presidential campaign.
The company also used its tax equity to invest more than $60 million in residential rooftop solar projects and poured money into film, producing a full-length documentary called DamNation about the ills of hydropower. It was beautifully shot and unapologetically strident, a common trait in Patagonia’s expanding media line. (Disclosure: Last year I edited a Patagonia book about bears in Mongolia.) The environmental-activism team now has a staff of 14, up from eight in 2012. During the 2016 presidential election, Patagonia hosted a series of voter-education events linked to environmental issues at its 30 nationwide retail locations. On election day, it closed all its offices and stores. When Trump won, the company opted to give away all its profits on Black Friday to environmental groups. Sales totaled $10 million, and Patagonia attracted 25,000 new customers.
“You can’t buy advertising like that,” Chouinard says. He adds, “I didn’t realize how much power we have. And to not use it would be irresponsible.”
This is what real corporate power looks like: The Koch brothers’ network of nonprofit organizations persuading members of Congress to sign a pledge not to vote for climate-change legislation unless it includes a tax break. Apple forcing utilities to adopt renewable energy when negotiating locations for its sprawling data centers.
Patagonia does not have that kind of ­power. Jigar Shah, a clean-energy entrepreneur and author of Creating Climate Wealth: Unlocking the Impact Economy, calls Patagonia one of the world’s five most influential companies when it comes to the environment. Competitors, he said, are “embarrassed” when Patagonia dreams up things like its Black Friday sale. But influence and power are different. When I asked Shah about the possibility of the company driving large-scale global change on its own, he said, “You and I both know they can’t.”
In some circles, Patagonia is viewed like $20 hand-roasted coffee at the farmers’ market—excellent but not easily scaled. A veteran of the solar-funding world noted that while Tin Shed Ventures backs admirable projects, they tend to be small, uncompromising, and “more likely to create good stories than impactful results.” Miriam Horn, an agriculture and fisheries expert at the Environmental Defense Fund and the author of Rancher, Farmer, Fisherman: ­Conservation Heroes of the American Heartland, told me: “I’m still waiting to be convinced by Patagonia Provisions. They have the right goals, worrying about carbon sequestration and soil, but their approach seems ­boutiquey.” M. Sanjayan, the CEO of Conservation International, called Patagonia “a pointy stick that you can use in a smart way.” He added, “We’re all happy they’re around and love wearing their stuff, but the conversation around the table with big players is not with Patagonia.”
Marcario and Chouinard say they’re playing a longer game. At its core, Patagonia has always been a company of invention, and with many issues they appear to be looking toward a far-off, more hopeful future. At times this can make them a lonely voice. In February, Kenna, the public relations director, who has good relationships on Capitol Hill, traveled with Lisa Pike Sheehy, Patagonia’s VP of environmental activism, to Washington for a series of meetings on public land and agriculture. When I was in Ventura, they debriefed Marcario inside Patagonia’s executive office. Marcario wore flip-flops and spoke quickly, tapping her left leg, laughing often, and dropping the occasional f-bomb—like when discussing the U.S.’s “fucking interests in fossil fuels.” Despite Patagonia’s bullishness about regenerative ag, Pike Sheehy said, the phrase was “fairly absent” during her Beltway meetings. Kenna had spoken with the chief of staff for Jon Tester, Montana’s Democratic senator, who is an organic farmer. Even so, Kenna said, “This wasn’t something they were talking about, and here’s an organic farmer in the Senate!”
The most promising takeaway from the trip was something Pike Sheehy heard Salt Lake City mayor Jackie Biskupski say during a presentation for environmental funders, shortly after the OIA had officially announced that it would be pulling Outdoor Retailer out of Utah. The mayor spoke about the growing ability of the outdoor industry to flex its economic muscle—and how that’s going to hurt. Pike Sheehy added, “It was exciting for me, as someone who’s been attending these meetings for over 15 years, to have the outdoor industry even mentioned as one with power. It was like a quantum leap.”
Indeed, the industry’s hardball strategy with Utah caught the attention of significant forces on the other side of the public-land issue. In March, The Wall Street Journal ran an editorial slamming Patagonia, titled “Utah Faces Down the Rock-Climbing Industrial Complex”—a sign of respect, it seemed. The author, Terry Anderson, of the Montana-based Property and Environment Research Center, which has taken funding from the Charles Koch Foundation, complained about the “enormous subsidy from the American taxpayer” that outdoor companies receive in the form of federally managed land.
 patagonia-women-lisa-and-corley.jpg
Corley Kenna (left) and Lisa Pike Sheehy (right). (Spencer Lowell)
This April, the OIA released a statement claiming that the industry generates $887 billion in annual domestic consumer spending, supporting 7.6 million jobs. Despite those numbers, the OIA has yet to embrace the dirty tools of real political influence. It has just two registered lobbyists, compared with the army working for oil and gas. But according to Sally Jewell, the former interior secretary and CEO of REI from 2005 to 2013, the industry “can compete with people.” She means that in a practical way. This spring, Jason Chaffetz, the outgoing Utah congressman, withdrew a bill that would have transferred millions of acres of federal land to the states, after hunting and fishing groups staged rallies opposing the measure.
REI, with a membership of 16 million—more than three times that of the NRA—is theoretically capable of exerting enormous pressure on lawmakers. With Bears Ears, it made a strong effort to do just that. During the Interior Department’s open-comment period on national monuments in the spring, REI sent out mass mailings to its members and produced an advocacy video for YouTube, generating what it says were 20 percent of all comments filed in the first week. Other brands threw their weight behind the cause, with the North Face doing an all-out social-media push to get customers to send their thoughts to the government through the Monuments for All website. Patagonia invested some $1.7 million in a Bears Ears campaign that included newspaper ads, a virtual-reality film, and a banner ad across the top of the New York Times website. It also launched an online platform that allowed users to send a comment directly to the Interior Department with a single click, resulting in some 150,000 submissions. Despite all that, interior secretary Ryan Zinke in June issued a report recommending that President Trump shrink the monument.
It’s one thing for outdoor companies to align on protection for public land, but it’s another entirely for them to put effort into the many issues that Patagonia seeks to champion. As REI CEO Jerry Stritzke put it to me, “We stay away from political matters” that aren’t central to the outdoors. He likes to talk about bipartisanship. So does Scott Baxter of the North Face and Amy Roberts of the OIA. Many brands in the industry serve a diverse constituency, selling products to both crunchy backpackers and swing voters. These companies face enormous risks by taking sides. Some of them saw the very public rift with Utah as a mistake. “There’s no lack of companies that are not ­happy,” said Peter Metcalf, the Black Diamond founder and Chouinard protégé. Jewell told me that, rather than taking an intransigent stance with Governor Herbert, “I would have been inclined to more diplomacy.”
Here lies a critical fault line. Patagonia aims to galvanize the industry during a time of crisis, but it insists on an uncompromising path of resistance. It’s a strategy that makes sense, given that the brand sells all those LIVE SIMPLY hats and T-shirts to a grassroots base that feeds on liberal outrage. Patagonia can gain only by fighting with everything it’s got. “Why should we kowtow to these redneck voters and Republican politicians?” Choui­nard asked when I met with him in early March. “The most you can achieve is a compromise, and that never solves a problem.”
This spring, the OIA was exploring plans to launch a nonprofit organization focused on public land and climate. When I asked Marcario if she would join, she responded carefully: “I’d like to see what they propose.” In a conversation with Patagonia VP of human resources Dean Carter, I wondered how Marcario and Chouinard would do sitting around a table with more politically cautious companies. He envisioned the industry’s larger players “wanting to be in a safe space, and Rose and Yvon going the opposite direction—‘screw safe,’ ” he said. “It would just drive us nuts.”
If you want to fight the power on your own, there’s one proven approach: take the bastards to court. Just hours after Zinke issued his recommendation that President Trump downsize Bears Ears, Patagonia announced plans to sue the administration should it issue any order diminishing the monument’s protections. In a public conference call alongside Navajo Nation attorney general Ethel Branch and New Mexico senator Tom Udall, Dessouky, Patagonia’s lead counsel, said, “We believe strongly that this is a step we need to take on behalf of our customers.”
The company had spent months planning for legal action and settled on a bold approach. It would seek standing to sue on the grounds that, as Dessouky later explained to me, for Patagonia “finding environmental solutions through business is as important as selling clothes.” She added: “We have an obligation as a benefit corporation to have a material effect on the environment.” This is an untested strategy. In many ways, Pata­gonia would be asking the courts to vali­date Choui­nard’s alternative ­economic universe, the ambitious model of responsible capitalism that has been his life’s work.
Legal experts I spoke to suggested that such a filing could be a long shot. Dan Farber, an expert on legal standing at the University of California at Berkeley, said that he thought the argument regarding the company’s focus on finding environmental solutions “seems problematic, because it’s not firmly connected to any particular parcel of land or administrative action. If I were in the government, I’d argue that it’s like ­Exxon saying they have standing to challenge anything that lowers the amount of driving people do.” Amanda Leiter, a law professor at American University who has worked in the Department of the Interior, argued that it “isn’t sufficient just to say we’ve spent money advocating one side of the issue.”
Still, just the threat of the lawsuit fueled speculative news stories. The week Patagonia announced its strategy, the Huffington Post ran a piece titled “Patagonia’s CEO Is Ready to Lead the Corporate Resistance to Donald Trump.” Shortly after, Breitbart News, the conservative site formerly run by White House strategist Stephen K. Bannon, published two attack pieces, one noting that “extreme environmentalism is far from the only liberal activism in which the company has engaged.” No one at Patagonia disputed this statement. Why would they? You can’t buy advertising like that.
The courts probably won’t end up ruling on Patagonia’s right to sue, one way or the other. Should Trump issue an order to shrink Bears Ears, immediate legal challenges will be filed by native tribes and multiple environmental NGOs. According to Mark Squillace, an expert on natural-­resources law at the University of Colorado, the courts will likely ask all plaintiffs with similar complaints to combine their briefs—only one plaintiff needs to qualify for a suit to go forward.
Patagonia is already financially supporting a coalition of nonprofits preparing to seek an injunction against any order reducing the size of Bears Ears. Joining a multiparty suit that may well drag on for years will demand many more dollars. Marcario is fine with that. “We need to win,” she told me sternly. “I’ve said to the outdoor industry, ‘We have to be as relentless as the NRA.’ We cannot give up an inch of protected land on our watch. Not an inch.” She added: “This is why our brand exists.”
In 1995, Yvon Chouinard wrote an essay outlining his vision for the future, called “The Next Hundred Years.” He shared candid reflections about grappling with whether it would do more good to give the company’s money away and check out, or to stay in the game to continue forwarding the business model. He settled on the latter. “If you want to change government, change the corporations, and the government will follow,” he wrote. “If you want to change corporations, change the consumers.”
One could argue that Patagonia has already done this. Chouinard may think that consulting with Walmart was a waste of time, but the retail giant has remained on a ­greener path, recently announcing its intent to remove a gigaton of carbon from its supply chain. Talk to anyone in the outdoor industry and they’ll tell you that Patagonia’s ­efforts overseas have improved labor practices from Sri Lanka to Vietnam. In 2018, during the midterm elections, Patagonia plans to turn its retail stores into get-out-the-vote centers. Meanwhile, everyone from Marmot to Orvis has launched a philanthropic wing.
The question now is what Patagonia could accomplish if it became a Nike-size megabrand. Rather than having an influence on 81 factories worldwide, as it currently does, it could influence practices in thousands of facilities, giving Marcario a seat with heads of state. Patagonia’s film division would be able to compete with Participant Media, producer of An Inconvenient Truth and Fast Food Nation. Patagonia Provisions could fill the aisles of Whole Foods with enough wild salmon that it has the economic clout to deny new dams or mines in Alaska and British Columbia. “If they became gigantic and other businesses that weren’t as progressive were displaced, that would be a good thing,” say Auden Schendler, VP of sustainability for the Aspen Skiing Company and a leader in the outdoor industry’s efforts to address climate change.
That kind of power would create many more scenes like the one I witnessed in May at the company’s distribution center in Reno, Nevada. Patagonia has a staff of about 500 there and was unveiling a new child care facility. At 9 a.m., Marcario took a tour of the building with senator Catherine Cortez ­Masto, the Democrat who was ­elected to fill Harry Reid’s seat last November. The women walked to an outdoor patio full of local-news cameras and Patagoniacs in plaid, then took their places in front of a small ­gazebo adorned with the company logo. Rick Ridgeway, Patagonia’s VP of Public Engagement, introduced Marcario as the “chief activist officer” and praised her as the person who had “scaled the business.” He ­added: “We are now a global leader.” Marcario leaned forward slightly, smiled, and blinked, her hands held behind her back. Marcario said, “When CEOs ask, ‘How can I get more ­women on my board? How can I get more women in management?’ I say, ‘Start a child care center.’ ”
The senator took the mic. She talked about Patagonia serving as an example for business and called the Reno center “a jewel.” Then she pivoted, placing a hand on her heart and saying, “I’m so glad Patagonia is leading that fight to protect our public lands. Believe me, that fight is just beginning.”
Meanwhile, back in Ventura, the Pata­gonia army will surely continue to take breathers from the battlefield. During one of my visits to the campus, I witnessed an adventure race that had employees sprinting through the streets of the city in spandex and tutus. A traveling artist joined in, ­declaring without irony, “Adventure is my medium.” On another night, I had dinner with a group of young staffers at a seafood joint. After a couple of beers, I asked them what they thought of the word “Patagucci,” the pejorative used to characterize the company’s prices. A long silence followed. Then a bearded guy who works in marketing said, “I take offense to it. That’s a bit of a bummer. There’s a reason why Patagonia costs so much.” The term, he said, “hurts me.” One of the company’s top designers backed him up: “Fantastic answer. I aggressively agree with that.” Then he added, “If we can get people inspired and having new experiences—­‘revolution’ might be too strong a word,” he said. “But I don’t think it is.”
Then they all started telling Yvon stories: About the time he tied a muffler to a car with a piece of fishing line. About the time he told a staffer to skip a flight because a TSA agent threatened to confiscate a fly box. About the fact that he doesn’t use computers or cell phones. They were striving, it seemed, to prove Patagonia’s authenticity by connecting the founder’s rugged past with the company’s shiny present and unknown future. It was at once sweet, plaintive, and a little cultish. But still—who would you rather buy your jacket from?
Abe Streep (@abestreep) is an Outside contributing editor.
Filed To: Gear / Adventure / Public Lands / Politics
Stay on Topic

How to Start a Fire, Plus 15 Other Skills That Aren't Complicated
How to Start a Fire, Plus 15 Other Skills That Aren't Complicated
By: Wes Siler
How to Become a Better Bike Rider in 9 Steps
How to Become a Better Bike Rider in 9 Steps
By: Axie Navas
The Toughest 5K on the Planet
The Toughest 5K on the Planet
By: Eva Holland
The Greatest Fitness Tips. Ever.
The Greatest Fitness Tips. Ever.
By: Grant Davis
MORE ADVENTURE
Outside 40th Anniversary
Our Mission

To inspire active participation in the world outside through award-winning coverage of the sports, people, places, adventure, discoveries, health and fitness, gear and apparel, trends and events that make up an active lifestyle.

Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Policy Ads Media Kit Subscriptions Affiliate-Link Policy RSS
© 2017 Mariah Media Network LLC.

Big. Crazy. Opinionated.
Get the Indefinitely Wild newsletter.
Email Address:
Enter your email address
SUBMIT
Skip to main content
The Guardian

The long read
Slaves of Isis: the long walk of the Yazidi women
When Isis rounded up Yazidi women and girls in Iraq to use as slaves, the captives drew on their collective memory of past oppressions – and a powerful will to survive. By Cathy Otten
 View more sharing options
Shares
2458
Tuesday 25 July 2017 06.00 BST Last modified on Wednesday 26 July 2017 18.10 BST
The day before Isis came was a holiday in Sinjar district, northern Iraq. Yazidis gathered to celebrate the end of a fasting period. It was 2 August 2014. Harvested wheat fields stood short and stubbly under the shadowless sun. People slaughtered sheep and gathered with their relatives to celebrate the holiday, handing out sweets and exchanging news and gossip. In the past, they would have invited their Muslim neighbours to join the celebrations, but more recently a distance had grown between them, leading the villagers to keep mostly to their own.


Lose yourself in a great story: Sign up for the long read email
 Read more
The atmosphere was restless and the temperature peaked above 40C (104F). The top of Mount Sinjar, just north of the town of Sinjar itself, appeared to be shimmering in the heat, and the people living below mostly avoided travelling until after the sun had set, when the streets were filled with neighbours trading fearful rumours, and men patrolling with guns.

At dusk, unfamiliar vehicles started to appear. The lights of the cars could be seen moving in the desert beyond the outlying villages. A sense of foreboding grew as darkness fell. The Yazidi men took their guns and set out to check the horizon beyond the wheat fields, peering toward the villages.

On their return, they gathered in Sinjar town centre in small, tense groups. Convoys of cars, kicking up dust in the distance, had appeared two months before, just before the city of Mosul – the capital of Nineveh province, of which Sinjar is a part – fell to Islamic State (Isis). Mosul is 120km (75 miles) east of Sinjar, and its capture was quickly followed by the fall of other towns. Four divisions of the Iraqi army collapsed, including the third division, which was based around Sinjar and included many Yazidis. The area was almost completely defenceless.

When they seized Mosul, Isis freed the Sunni Muslims from the city’s Badoush prison and executed 600 Shia prisoners. The group plundered weapons and equipment from Iraqi army bases. Soldiers scattered their uniforms, and half a million civilians fled north and east. Within a week, a third of Iraq was under Isis control. Sinjar district, with a population of around 300,000, was surrounded. Only a thin strip of contested road remained, linking them to the relative safety of the Iraqi Kurdistan in the north – but the journey was dangerous.

The Kurdistan region in northern Iraq is semi-autonomous, and guarded by the peshmerga, who now had to defend the four Kurdish provinces against Isis. “Peshmerga” means “those who face death”, and the word is heavy with the historical import of the Kurdish struggle against oppression. In the south-east of the region, on the Iranian border, part of the peshmerga clashed with Isis, but near Sinjar, an uneasy stillness hung in the air like a tension headache that comes before a storm.

Leila is from a family of Yazidi farmers and shepherds. She is small with a pale, girlish face, even though she is 25, and gives off a kind, practical air. She has two younger sisters and three older brothers. As a child she worked on the family farm with her brothers, and after a spate of sheep thefts on their ranch, they decided to move closer to Kojo, a village below Mount Sinjar.

Leila’s brothers had joined the peshmerga after the US-led invasion of Iraq in 2003. On 2 August 2014, their colleagues in nearby Siba Sheikheder came under attack from Isis and called for help. Siba Sheikheder, south of Sinjar, is the closest Yazidi town to the Syrian border, a collection of a few hundred squat buildings. By mid-morning on 3 August 2014, the peshmerga stationed in Kojo had fled. In the confusion, Leila’s family and around 100 others decided to run, but most people stayed, unsure what was going to happen to them.

Leila’s younger sister was living in Siba Sheikheder with her new husband, and phoned home to her parents that morning: “We’re running – Isis is coming,” she said. Leila and her family drove north to Sinjar, leaving her uncle at home to guard the house. Arriving in Sinjar, they realised the town was already under attack and its people were fleeing. Gathering together in a patch of scrubland outside Sinjar, they phoned her uncle. He told them the area was surrounded and Isis would not let anyone leave.

 Displaced Yazidis from Sinjar fleeing Isis walk towards the Syrian border, August 2014
 Displaced Yazidis from Sinjar fleeing Isis walk towards the Syrian border, August 2014. Photograph: Rodi Said/Reuters
They were trapped. Shortly after the phone call, a group of Isis fighters approached them and told them to hand over money, guns, gold and phones. Leila remembers that the leader had a red face and beard and was called “emir” (“prince”) by the others. Fighters drove her family to one of the central government offices in Sinjar, where ID cards used to be issued. What seemed like thousands of women and girls had been gathered inside the building’s offices, with men crammed together on the second floor. At around 9pm, Isis guards brought lanterns inside and began inspecting the faces of the women and girls. The women huddled together for protection, and as the men drew near to Leila, she was so scared that she fainted. This saved her from being taken away that night. Five of her female cousins were not so lucky.

The Yazidi women in Sinjar didn’t realise it yet, but the Isis fighters were carrying out a pre-planned mass abduction for the purpose of institutionalised rape. Initially they were looking for unmarried women and girls over eight.

When Sinjar district was attacked by Isis, more than 100,000 people fled to take refuge on Mount Sinjar. Those who couldn’t flee were rounded up. Many of the men were massacred. Thousands of Yazidis were either executed and thrown into pits, or died of dehydration, injuries or exhaustion on the mountain. So many people were missing that the enslavement of women didn’t immediately come to international attention.

According to Iraqi MP Vian Dakhil, herself a Yazidi from Sinjar, an estimated 6,383 Yazidis – mostly women and children – were enslaved and transported to Isis prisons, military training camps, and the homes of fighters across eastern Syria and western Iraq, where they were raped, beaten, sold, and locked away. By mid-2016, 2,590 women and children had escaped or been smuggled out of the caliphate and 3,793 remained in captivity.

The Yazidis are a majority-Kurdish-speaking religious group living mostly in northern Iraq. They number less than one million worldwide. The Yazidis, throughout their history, have been persecuted as infidels by Muslim rulers who demanded that they convert. Rather than formal ceremonies, their religious practice involves visiting sacred places. Yazidis participate in baptism and feasts, sing hymns and recite stories. Some of the stories are about historical and mythical battles fought in protection of the religion. Others, told over the centuries by generations of women, detail methods of resistance to the same threats that Yazidi women face today.

The Yazidis had already been made vulnerable by forced displacement under Saddam Hussein, economic meltdown under UN sanctions, the breakdown of the state and security after the US-led invasion of 2003, and the political failures that followed. In Iraq there are now around 500,000 Yazidis, primarily from the Sinjar region in Nineveh province in the country’s north. The Yazidis of Syria and Turkey have mostly all fled to neighbouring countries or to Europe. In Germany, their numbers are estimated at 25,000.

“Not all violence is hot. There’s cold violence, too, which takes its time and finally gets its way,” Teju Cole wrote in a 2015 essay about Palestine. Around the world, a broader kind of cold violence continues. It’s the violence of indignity, of forgetting, of carelessness and of not listening. It’s there in the way politicians talk about refugees, and in the way the stateless are sometimes written about and photographed by the western media. It’s there in the fear of outsiders. It’s there in the way humans dismiss other humans as less worthy of protection or care. When cold violence and hot violence merge, we get mass killings inflicted on the most vulnerable.

Yazidis have suffered massacres and oppression for generations. But there was something different about the Isis attack that took place in the late summer of 2014. This time the media took notice.

Many of the stories about the abduction and enslavement of Yazidi women and children described them as “sex slaves” and featured graphic, sometimes lurid, accounts by newly escaped survivors. The female fighters of Kurdish militias helping to free Yazidis from Mount Sinjar became fodder for often novelty coverage. The Yazidis became the embodiment of embattled, exotic minorities set against the evil of Isis. This narrative has stereotyped Yazidi women as passive victims of mass rape at the hands of perpetrators presented as the epitome of pure evil.


‘I was sold seven times': the Yazidi women welcomed back into the faith
 Read more
It was only much later in my reporting on how some Yazidi women managed to escape and return that I became aware of how important stories of captivity and resistance were to dealing with trauma, both historically and in relation to Isis. Yazidism is a closed religion and identity, one that is passed down through generations by stories and music. These practices have been extended to dealing with the traumas of their treatment at the hands of Isis.

Many of the women and children captured in Sinjar had seen or heard their male relatives being killed by the armed Isis fighters who now surrounded them. In jails across Iraq and Syria, where the women were held, they felt a sense of “abject terror on hearing footsteps in the corridor outside and keys opening the locks”, said a report by the UN commission on Syria that designated the Isis crimes against the Yazidis as genocide. “The first 12 hours of capture were filled with sharply mounting terror. The selection of any girl was accompanied by screaming as she was forcibly pulled from the room, with her mother and any other women who tried to keep hold of her being brutally beaten by fighters. [Yazidi] women and girls began to scratch and bloody themselves in an attempt to make themselves unattractive to potential buyers.”

At first, the women and girls were taken to prearranged locations in Iraq where they were handed out to the Isis fighters who took part in the attack on Sinjar. To avoid being raped, some of the girls killed themselves by slitting their wrists or throats, or hanging themselves, or throwing themselves from buildings.

Amid the panic in the Sinjar ID office, Leila decided to pose as a mother to her small niece and nephew after she saw the other women being taken away, and correctly assumed that being unmarried was dangerous. The following day, the Yazidi men on the second floor disappeared.

Leila was transported 50km east to a school-turned-prison in Tel Afar, where the women were crowded into classrooms functioning as cells, guarded by fighters who continued to pick out beautiful girls to serve as slaves. Each time they were moved, their names and ages were noted down on a list.

In the coming weeks, some Yazidis managed to escape by walking through the night across muddy fields, keeping to the valleys to avoid Isis checkpoints and reach the peshmerga. It was in those first few days that the Yazidis could most feasibly have been rescued. The captives were held together and some still had mobile phones hidden under their clothes to call relatives back in Kurdistan and tell them exactly where they were. But with little by way of rapid international or governmental support materialising, a sense of abandonment soon grew among the families waiting for their loved ones.

“Within days of what happened to the Yazidis on the mountain, the phone calls went from ‘help us survive’ to ‘they’ve kidnapped these women and can you help us to rescue them,’” said Tom Malinowski, then the US assistant secretary for democracy, human rights and labour, when interviewed in February 2016 during a visit to Erbil, the capital of the Kurdistan region. “Hostage rescues are one of the most dangerous things to do, but when they [the women] were still being held in large groups this was discussed, but tragically they were then dispersed … It is still very much on our minds and something we know has to be considered.”

To date there have been no known, large-scale rescue missions to free the Yazidi captives in Iraq and Syria, by either the US, Iraqi or Kurdistan regional governments.

According to Isis, it has no choice but to attack and kill disbelieving men. Flowing from this, it justifies the enslaving of their women as an act of protection, a way of replacing the men who previously looked after them. This idea is crucial to the role of slavery in Isis’s conception of how a caliphate should function.

Implicit in the goal of eliminating the Yazidi community is the idea that society would be better without them, which is common to all genocides, said former UN investigator Sareta Ashraph. The enslavement, for Isis, is meant to eventually bring the women to Islam, and is part of their ideology of conquest. “[It is] among the greatest forms of the honour of Islam and its sharia [Islamic law], as it is a clear affirmation showing the supremacy of the people of sharia, and the greatness of their affairs, and the dominance of their state, and the power of their might,” according to an Isis pamphlet on slavery.

Isis describes its own use of enslavement through a mix of clumsy metaphors about sex, war and power. Dividing up the captive women and children among the Isis mujahideen [holy warriors] and “sanctioning their genitals” is described as a sign of “realisation and dominance by the sword”.

Katherine E Brown, a lecturer in Islamic studies at the University of Birmingham, explained that Isis mainly justifies its use of slavery through selective interpretations of the hadith, the reported accounts of the life and sayings of Muhammad and his companions: “They justify it on the basis that it is a reward for carrying out services for the community – slaves are presented as compensation for fighters. However, they chose particular ways of seeing these hadith, and selectively choose them so as to ignore, for example, the requirement not to kill your prisoners by focusing on the requirement to make sure they ‘don’t escape’ by being ‘secured at the neck’ until negotiations have taken place.”

 A displaced Yazidi woman in the northern Iraqi town of Dohuk, May 2015.
 A Yazidi woman in the northern Iraqi town of Dohuk, May 2015. Photograph: Safin Hamed/AFP/Getty Images
The promise of sexual slavery is used as a sweetener when recruiting disaffected young men to Isis. At the same time, media stories about sex and violence involving non-Muslim women being enslaved by Muslim men feed stereotypes about Muslim men that create divisions that Isis can then exploit.

“Slavery serves to increase the Isis community because Yazidi women will give birth and the children will be brought up among its fighters,” writes the author of the Isis pamphlet.

The same document calls on fighters to treat their slaves well, citing words from the Qur’an calling for them to be good to “those whom your right hand possess” – a euphemism for a female captive – and cites Islamic texts with instructions not to hit the slave’s face, and to emancipate the slave who becomes a believer, for which the master will be rewarded by God.

But, as with other strictures, there is a gap between Isis proclamations and an abusive, often violent reality. Isis used gang rape as punishment for women and girls who tried to escape to further degrade and control them physically and psychologically. Despite this, many of the women continued to fight back against their captors, risking punishment and death in pursuit of freedom.

After the women were captured, they didn’t immediately become slaves to the fighters, but were held for a period while their details were recorded. The process was systematised. Women were then sold in markets, either electronically over a mobile phone messenger app where their photos and slave numbers were exchanged, or in market halls and prisons at prearranged times.

Away from the main markets, women and girls, supplied by fighters or Isis members who acted as middlemen, were sold by local brokers in smaller numbers. At the beginning, they were given mainly to Iraqi fighters who took part in the battle for Sinjar. Subsequently, the remaining captives were taken to Syria, and sold there, often to fighters who had arrived from around the world.

In late 2014, a group of young, bearded men sat on long sofas lining the walls of a living room somewhere in the caliphate, wearing ammunition-packed vests. They joked with one another. “Today is distribution day, God willing,” said one of the men, as he flashed a grin at his companions. “You can sell your slave, or give her as a gift … You can do whatever you want with your share,” said another fighter in view of the cameraman who was recording the exchange. The men didn’t seem to notice and continued discussing buying women for “three banknotes or a pistol”.

By the summer of 2013, Raqqa, 370km west of Mosul in northern Syria, became Isis’s de facto capital, and supporters from all over the world flocked there to join the group. It was also the destination for other women from Sinjar.

“When we got to the farm [near Raqqa], we saw four or five buses full of Isis members with long hair and beards,” said Zahra, a farmer’s daughter from Kojo. “They were like animals. On the first day they came among us and started picking girls for themselves. Two or three of them would catch the girls, blindfold them and take them by force into a car. The girls were crying and shouting but they didn’t care.”

From the second floor of the building, the girls could see the Euphrates river, but they were hidden from view by the surrounding trees and fences.

“We were just like sheep, when the shepherd goes toward them and the sheep disperse; that’s how we were, running away from them,” said Zahra. She fled when the men came, but she was blocked by a fence at the edge of the farm. On the first day the men took 20-40 girls. Food was delivered from a local restaurant for those who remained, but they were too scared to eat. They covered their faces with ash to try and look unattractive in the hope that they wouldn’t be picked.

After two days, Zahra and her sister were taken to an underground Isis prison in Raqqa. Hundreds of women were crammed into three rooms in what was just one of several similar structures that were used for holding women in Raqqa. The girls arrived at night and weren’t allowed to see the outside of the building – a tactic similar to that used by the Syrian government in its jails, said Sareta Ashraph.

 A Yazidi woman abducted by Isis is carried to safety near Mount Sinjar
 A Yazidi woman abducted by Isis is carried to safety near Mount Sinjar. Photograph: Channel 4
Inside the prison, the women had to share a few filthy, overflowing toilets, forcing them to stand in raw sewage. Their bodies were crawling with sand flies. The only light came from two solar-powered lamps hanging from the ceiling, one prisoner recalled. Each morning the guards would give them a small piece of bread and cheese to share between two, and in the evening some rice and soup.

Some women sat on bags or clothes to try and avoid touching the filthy ground. Children cried constantly with hunger. The women waited under the constant fear of rape or death. “They were always beating us and we had diarrhea because of the fear,” said a woman I shall call Khulka, who is 30 years old and comes from the town of Tel Qasab. She had arrived at the prison with her four children, inside a refrigerator truck normally used for ice-cream. “We didn’t have a shower for one month and we always had lice in our hair. After two months they took us outside, but we couldn’t stand because we hadn’t seen the sun for so long,” she said.

While in the jail, Khulka tattooed herself with the names of her husband and father, so that her body could be recognised and returned to them if she was killed. She mixed breast milk from a lactating woman with ash, and used a needle she had smuggled into the jail. With the same needle and some thread, she began embroidering her underwear with the names and numbers listed in her phone in case Isis found it and took it away. Khulka had been to school, and unlike many of the women there, she knew how to read and write. She also sewed other women’s clothes with their loved ones’ names and numbers so that they would not be forgotten.

Historically, Yazidis associated formal education with repressive state authorities, the suppression of their language, and the threat of religious conversion. In the years before 2014, literacy rates had been improving in Sinjar, but many women and girls worked in the fields to support their families while their brothers went to school. Illiteracy made it harder for women to escape after they were taken into captivity, because they couldn’t read the signs on unfamiliar buildings in Isis-held towns and cities.

Khulka was taken to a side room in the prison with her children and photographed by the Isis guards who gave her the slave number 16, which was then printed above her photo. There were around 500 women in the jail, she recalls, and all of them had to pose with their children and were given slave numbers. Before the picture was taken, she cut her daughter’s hair to make her look like a boy and stop them being separated. If the guards recognised her daughter as a young girl, there was more chance she’d be taken. The other imprisoned women envied Khulka’s grey hair, thinking it might save her from being seized. They tried to imitate it using ash.

“Some of these women and girls resisted forced conversion, protected themselves against violence, or at least tried to, and protected their children. How they resisted really shows incredible intelligence, courage and strength,” said human rights lawyer and gender justice advocate Sherizaan Minwalla.


Kidnapped by Isis at 15: 'I never thought I'd see the day when I was free'
 Read more
Yazidi women who fled what is now Turkey during the first world war and the chaos that followed passed down stories that are repeated among Sinjaris today. Among them are accounts of how they did as Khulka was now doing: covering their daughters’ faces with ash and cutting their hair.

In the same prison, Zahra and her sisters were put together into small rooms. They heard screaming and crying as Isis guards came in the middle of the night to drag away the girls. The guards came for Zahra’s middle sister first. When Zahra pleaded with them not to take them separately, one of the guards whipped her with a cable.

After her sister was taken from the cell, the door opened again. This time Zahra was grabbed by two large men and shoved into a car. “I won’t go until you give me my sister!” she cried out. The men drove her to a house in Raqqa belonging to an Isis member who kept her as his slave, then sold her on after four months to another Isis fighter. He found her disobedient and sold her on straight away to a fighter of only 18, who lived at a compound for Libyan fighters near Deir ez-Zor in eastern Syria.

Many Yazidi girls were by being held in the same compound of 100 to 200 caravans where the Libyan fighters lived. The women and girls were chained, beaten, raped and passed around like animals between the men. At the edge of the compound, a barbed-wire fence prevented them from escaping. The stories of privation and torture suffered by Yezidi women in this compound are some of the worst in a long catalogue of abuses.

After a little more than a month at the farm, Leila and three other girls from Kojo were taken back to Iraq and kept in a military base near the Iraq–Syria border, more than 200km south of Sinjar in Anbar province. The military base was in Al-Qa’im, a border crossing between Iraq and Syria, but by that time, under the caliphate, it was merely a pitstop between Isis-held stretches of desert. It was also a common crossing point for slaves passing between markets in Isis towns and cities. Leila was sold to a man called Muhammad, who looked familiar to her. Then she remembered who he was: his family were like godparents to her family.

When Leila recognised Muhammad, she was relieved: she thought he would rescue her, and maybe sell her back to her family. Instead, he sold her on. Three days later, Leila was taken to a military base near Ramadi and sold to an Isis military commander. Later, after she had escaped and was in Baghdad, someone asked her what she would do if she saw Muhammad again. “I would burn him alive,” she said.

The Isis commander who bought Leila in Ramadi was a notorious sadist known as Shakir Wahib, who had been terribly wounded in fighting, and was now trafficking women for sex and organising gang rapes. When one woman arrived in early 2016, having held on to a mobile phone, Leila managed to call her brother in Kurdistan and told him he needed to send someone to rescue her before the woman was moved on, and her phone with her. For two days, calls went back and forth between Leila and a smuggler called Abdullah, who eventually helped her to escape. Abdullah used to work in Aleppo and had a wide network of business contacts in Syria and Iraq. He had become a smuggler after 50 members of his family were kidnapped by Isis.

Most of the smugglers working to rescue Yazidi women are Yazidi businessmen. Some of the women are bought back from the Isis fighters holding them, or from the slave markets or online auctions. The cost of smuggling is reflective of the danger involved. It’s not clear how much of the cash ends up with Isis, and how much goes to middlemen or the smugglers.

This black market thrives because families are left with no other options. The war against Isis continues to win back territory from the militants, but Yazidis told me that they would prefer the focus to be on saving their captive women and children, rather than winning back terrain.

 Yazidis displaced by Isis in a camp near Dohuk, Iraqi Kurdistan, January 2015
 Yazidis displaced by Isis in a camp near Dohuk, Iraqi Kurdistan, January 2015. Photograph: Safin Hamed/AFP/Getty Images
After reaching Baghdad, Leila and her niece travelled north by plane to the Kurdish city of Sulaimaniyah, and then by road to the camps where many Yazidis from Sinjar had taken refuge, and where their families were waiting. When Leila arrived, she collapsed sobbing into the arms of her female relatives. She was in such a state of shock that, for the first few weeks, she had trouble understanding what her family were saying when they tried to talk to her.

“Sometimes I watch the TV and I see the news of the army taking more land and villages, but it’s not this that we are worried about – it is our people who are still imprisoned,” Leila said. “We know most of them are in Raqqa, so why are [the army] not going to save them there?”

The failures have been broad and deep. Earlier this month, Iraqi forces, backed by coalition air cover, declared victory over Isis in Mosul. But for many, the price of that victory was high: civilians were killed by Isis as they tried to flee, as well as being bombarded by Iraqi forces and the coalition. In March 2017 a US airstrike on a house where families were sheltering in western Mosul killed more than 100 civilians.

Attention has now moved from Iraq to the presence of Isis in Syria, and the battle for Raqqa. As Iraq’s politicians and their military patrons prepare to congratulate themselves, the Yazidi community looks on from displacement camps, rented homes or forced asylum overseas. Almost two years after it was cleared of Isis by Kurdish forces, Sinjar town remains in ruins. A new wave of fighting for Sinjar district is under way, with Turkey eyeing a violent incursion after bombing the area in April. The idea that this represents “liberation” is seen by Yazidis as a bad joke. The UN and others have tried to recognise and document the genocide, but justice looks a long way off. Meanwhile, the battle for survival of the women and girls who were taken by Isis continues long after their return.

Sinjar was recaptured from Isis by Kurdish forces, led by the peshmerga, in November 2015. Since then the peshmerga and other Kurdish armed groups have been in a hostile standoff with each other, with rival groups providing arms, training and patronage to local Yazidis. Brightly coloured flags of the various groups flutter above their respective checkpoints, which are sometimes only metres apart along roads that were recently controlled by Isis.

Yazidis now fear renewed attacks not just from Isis, but also from their Kurdish liberators. Yazidis themselves are not politically homogenous, and many distrust the rival Kurdish groups. By May 2016, despite the liberation, only 3,220 families had returned to Sinjar district.

While the infighting goes on, Isis stands only to gain. Yazidis are stuck in a complex series of client-patron relationships with Kurdish leaders, in which ethnic identification is used in exchange for promises of safety. Meanwhile, the Yazidis remain unable to define their future, militarily or politically. While military clashes continue, any political settlement to the rivalry between liberating forces looks a long way off.

Main photograph: Rodi Said/Reuters

This is an edited extract from With Ash On Their Faces: Yazidi Women and the Islamic State by Cathy Otten, which will be published by Or Books in October.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, or sign up to the long read weekly email here.

Since you’re here …
… we have a small favour to ask. More people are reading the Guardian than ever but advertising revenues across the media are falling fast. And unlike many news organisations, we haven’t put up a paywall – we want to keep our journalism as open as we can. So you can see why we need to ask for your help. The Guardian’s independent, investigative journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce. But we do it because we believe our perspective matters – because it might well be your perspective, too.

I appreciate there not being a paywall: it is more democratic for the media to be available for all and not a commodity to be purchased by a few. I’m happy to make a contribution so others with less means still have access to information.
Thomasine F-R.
If everyone who reads our reporting, who likes it, helps to support it, our future would be much more secure.

Become a supporter
Make a contribution
Topics
The long read
Islamic State

Refugees

Syria

Middle East and North Africa

Kurds

features
Share on LinkedIn Share on Pinterest Share on Google+
Reuse this content
more on this story

Syria: US-led coalition accused of failing to avoid civilian deaths
6hSyria: US-led coalition accused of failing to avoid civilian deaths

UN Syria investigator quits over concern about Russian obstruction
4dUN Syria investigator quits over concern about Russian obstruction

Syrian feminists: ‘This is the chance the war gave us – to empower women’
4dSyrian feminists: ‘This is the chance the war gave us – to empower women’

Al-Qaida-linked militants' advance throws west's Syria plans into disarray
4 Aug 2017Al-Qaida-linked militants' advance throws west's Syria plans into disarray
Syrian groups complain that other countries are hijacking UN peace talks
3 Aug 2017Syrian groups complain that other countries are hijacking UN peace talks
 Escape from Syria: Rania's odyssey – video
2 Aug 2017Escape from Syria: Rania's odyssey – video
George and Amal Clooney to help fund Syrian refugee schools in Lebanon
1 Aug 2017George and Amal Clooney to help fund Syrian refugee schools in Lebanon
 Syrians return to live in ravaged Aleppo – in pictures
6 Jul 2017Syrians return to live in ravaged Aleppo – in pictures

promoted links
from around the web
Recommended by Outbrain
About this Content
Kowloon Taxi Driver Got Paid HK$400 In Bitcoins In 2010, Now He's A Millionaire
Kowloon Taxi Driver Got Paid HK$400 In Bitcoins In 2010, Now He's A Millionaire
WWW.INVESTINGDAILY.ME
Hong Kong Banks Are Worried You Read About This
Hong Kong Banks Are Worried You Read About This
THE STRATEGY INSIDER
Why Invest in Diamonds
Why Invest in Diamonds
INVEST DESK
即日開始賺錢！請在Booking.com出租您的住宿
即日開始賺錢！請在Booking.com出租您的住宿
BOOKING.COM
Richard Branson's Latest Investment Secrets Leaked. Here Is What You Need To Know
INDIRECT TV
The Reading Habits Of Highly Successful People
BLINKIST MAGAZINE
Find out why 1 Million+ Small Businesses love Xero
XERO
'Cowardly' for party to hit Abe while he's down: new minister
NIKKEI ASIAN REVIEW
most viewed
The Guardian back to top
home
UK
world selected
sport
football
opinion
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
 all sections
world
›	iraq

become a supporter
make a contribution
securedrop
solve technical issue
advertise with us
work for us
contact us
complaints & corrections
terms & conditions
privacy policy
cookie policy
digital newspaper archive
all topics
all contributors
facebook
twitter
© 2017 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.
NYMAG.COM
DAILY INTELLIGENCER
VULTURE
THE CUT
SCIENCE OF US
SELECT ALL
GRUB STREET
THE STRATEGIST
LOG IN
REGISTER
FOLLOW:FACEBOOKTWITTERINSTAGRAM
Devouring Culture
TV
MOVIES
MUSIC
PLUS WHAT TO STREAM
Search
Search

HOT TOPICS:
THE DARK FUTURES OF POP CULTURE
GAME OF THRONES
DUNKIRK
TWIN PEAKS
AWARDS
In Conversation: Trent Reznor
The Nine Inch Nails’ icon on his new music, the future of streaming, and his tortured past.

By David Marchese

Photograph by Corinne Schiavone
July 26, 2017
9:54 am
Share
Tweet
Pin It
Email
Comment
Print
“I get anxious about long interviews,” says Trent Reznor, smiling shyly from a leather couch at an empty hotel bar in Bakersfield, California, “but it’s nice to have a break from rehearsing the set and feeling suicidal about how much more work we have to do.” Sipping from an early-morning black coffee, Reznor is dressed in heavy boots, green cargo shorts, and a black T-shirt. He’s here with Nine Inch Nails, the musical project he’s led since 1988, to prepare for a spate of summer festival appearances, including one at New York’s Panorama, in support of the band’s new Add Violence EP, the second in a planned trio of releases all connected by the same cryptic story line.

Those efforts represent the first new Nine Inch Nails recordings since 2013’s Hesitation MarksThe band’s most recent full-length album. , but with Reznor, silence is never a sign of inactivity. Of late, this paragon of musical and emotional extremism has become a respected voice on the promise and failure of streaming music, and works closely with Apple Music on the tech giant’s efforts in that realm.
(He’s also become an Oscar-winning film composer, in partnership with his NIN bandmate Atticus RossThe British musician and producer whose work with Nine Inch Nails goes back to 2005’s With Teeth, and who became an official band member late last year. Ross has also collaborated with Reznor on several film scores, including the Oscar-winning score to The Social Network. .) It does seem, though, that returning to the music that made him famous has put Reznor in an expansive — and pugnacious — mood. Or maybe he’s just a little antsy in anticipation of the impending live shows. “These are my last few moments of life,” he says as the conversation begins, “let’s make the most of it.”

For a long time, you were one of the real avatars of white male angst and anger. Have you noticed a change in how those feelings get expressed culturally? There’s a toxicity and meanness in the air now that I don’t think was there when you one were, for lack of a better term, a poster boy for alienation.
I never thought about Nine Inch Nails in that context. From my perspective, I was doing what Morrissey and Robert SmithSteven Patrick Morrissey of the Smiths and Robert Smith of the Cure. Icons of 1980s English-rock melancholia.  had done, which was expressing a sense of “I don’t fucking fit in anywhere.” It was never about any larger cultural sense of oppression or disenfranchisement. I was thinking if we can take music that embraces and toughens up the sound of electronics, brings the aggression of Throbbing GristleThe confrontational English group widely credited with creating industrial music, originally active from 1976 to 1981.  and hard rock, and also instills an honest lyric — we might have something. I don’t think what we were tapping into was at all similar to the absurdity of whatever Gamergate represents, if that’s what you’re suggesting.

It’s part of it. I’m sure this is both simplistic and naïvely idealistic, but I can’t help but think there are a lot of alienated people out there who might be better served by the kind of catharsis Nine Inch Nails was offering in 1994 than by whatever itch is getting scratched by being an online troll.
I sort of think I was kind of a trailblazer when it comes to getting trolled,Reznor was an early and enthusiastic tweeter. He deleted his account in 2009, citing his frustration with trolls. He’s since reactivated, though in more polite fashion. so I’m very familiar with the rage that seems to fuel the Trump voter or the angry internet commenter. When we first started off, our interaction with our audience would be someone recognizing you at a record store and saying, “I’m not a fan, but my so-and-so is.” Okay, fuck you. Or people would find out where you live and send you a letter and you’d read something that clearly came from an insane person. Then the internet connected everybody. I remember the Prodigy bulletin boardAn early precursor to the online forum, “bulletin boards” offered from the online service Prodigy allowed users to post and respond to messages in subject-specific boards, which were sometimes moderated by professionals in the topic.  and being fascinated to see there was a Nine Inch Nails room. The promise of that kind of interaction with fans was exciting. The consequences of how that interaction has evolved have not been.

What are were those consequences?
One is the demystification of artists. Growing up, I didn’t know what Pink FloydLegendary and enigmatic British rock group best known for their 1973 album, The Dark Side of the Moon.  looked like and I didn’t need to know. In my mind, they looked like fucking wizards, man. I remember seeing a picture of SupertrampThe English prog-rock group was best known for their 1979 album, Breakfast in America, which sold millions at the time.  — and I loved Breakfast in America — and I was like, What the fuck?


Nine Inch Nails performing in the United Kingdom in 1994. Photo: Mick Hutson/Redferns
You know, intentionally or not, Supertramp was all about shattering illusions.
Forget just photos: I didn’t know anything about them. Something in me needed the people making the music I loved to seem larger in life. I needed heroes. David BowieNine Inch Nails toured with Bowie in 1995. In 1997, Reznor played a menacing figure opposite Bowie in the video for Bowie’s “I’m Afraid of Americans.” After Bowie’s death last year, Reznor credited Bowie with helping him get sober.  was a fucking alien, you know? As it happens, he was a fucking alien. I was lucky enough to be friends with him and he was even cooler than I’d thought. But demystification is a real problem. There’ve been people whose music I can’t like anymore because I’ve seen them bitching on Twitter about a waiter like a fucking asshole.

Can you tell me who?
I don’t really want to start a battle. I’ll give you a good counterexample: I appreciate what Radiohead has been doing the last few years. You’re not saturated with stories about them. They’re not in the press constantly talking about stuff. They create an aura that makes you more interested in what they’re doing. That’s a good position to be in versus what I’m doing right now, which I’m sure is ruining people’s impression of me.

What are other consequences of fans knowing more about the musicians they love? And also of being able to communicate with them?
Another problem is that it’s too easy to listen to the opinion of the anonymous basement-dweller, and that’s bad for art. Criticism hurts. Hearing someone say that you’re a piece of shit or that the song you’re insecure about sucks is harmful. And I have a hard time unhearing that stuff, so I really had to learn not pay attention. When I did Pretty Hate MachineNine Inch Nails’$2 1989 debut album combined industrial grit, confessional lyrics, and synth-pop catchiness. It position Reznor for the mass audience breakthrough of The Downward Spiral. , I didn’t think anybody was going to hear it. Then suddenly it was, “Hey, X amount of people bought your record and it’s time to write a new one.” And you’re thinking, I wonder what they liked about that other record I made? What if I want to take a detour into free jazz? How is that going to go over? When you’re not thinking about the audience, you can make more pure art.

Are there any artists that you think are using social media smartly? I know they exist in a different online world than you, but people like Drake and Taylor Swift sure seem canny about how and when they engage with fans.
Those examples would probably be the best answer to this question. I don’t pay much attention, but I see what Drake’s been able to pull off in terms of being omnipresent and constantly engaging an audience that seems to enjoy the way he’s engaging them. I’m just not part of that audience. I’m not as well-rounded as I used to be about pop culture. I’m not saying pop music isn’t well-crafted or the people who make it aren’t wonderful, but it’s not for me. I’ve asked people, “What is it that’s good about Drake?” I’ve said to my friends at Apple: “Explain to me why.” As the old guy, I don’t see it.

Did anybody give you any satisfactory answers?
I wasn’t even asking cynically. I was curious what it is that he’s touching on. The answers I got made me go, “That’s it?” But knowing the right way to interact with your crowd in a way that feels cool is a good thing. I’m just doing it for a different sized audience. The stakes aren’t the same for me, and that’s fine.

Because of your work with Beats and Apple Music, and also because of how quickly Nine Inch Nails adapted to various online realities, you’re often held up as someone who credibly bridges music and tech. Do you feel culturally at home in both worlds? Is there anything to the idea that tech entrepreneurs are the new rock stars?
What a load of bullshit that is. It’s important to unpack a couple things: What’s your quantification of success? Is it money or something else? This is nothing against somebody who has a great idea and wants to get funded — more power to you. That’s a cool new economy, and coding is an incredibly creative and artful medium. But if success is purely measured in how high on some Forbes list you are, then by all means, go make a new app. I’m biased: Music or film or writing or journalism — things that inspire emotional connections are so much more important to me than things that only have utilitarian ends. I’m glad someone figured out a food-delivery service. That’s made my life a little bit better. But that’s not that interesting to me. A good song can become part of my soul. So this whole nonsense about tech rock stars is farce. What else were we saying about tech world?

How you fit into it.
My experience with Beats MusicIn 2013, Reznor was named chief creative officer of what was called “Project Daisy,” a music-streaming service concept created by Beats and intended to compete with Spotify and other streaming services. It would ultimately be released as Beats Music. When Apple bought Beats in 2014, the service was folded into Apple’s own Apple Music, which Reznor continues to help develop.  and then at Apple largely was dismissed from outside, maybe justifiably, as here’s another celebrity moron holding up a phone and expecting some sort of credit. That kind of situation, which mine isn’t, would be insulting to the people that actually are doing the important jobs. And I don’t want to hear about “Ashton Kutcher’s a fucking tech genius.”As a venture capitalist, Kutcher has invested in tech companies including Skype, Airbnb, and Foursquare.  I don’t give a shit about that. He seems like an asshole.

Ouch.
[Laughs.] I don’t know where that rage just came from. But all I can say is that I’ve learned a hell of a lot from working at Beats and Apple. I’ve seen a lot, and it’s interesting to be behind the scenes and meet really cool, smart people that I highly respect. Now, and I’m not talking about Apple here: I’m not yearning to be a tech guy. Being in that world has made me realize the true value of being an artist. The economics of music aren’t what they should be, and the culture isn’t giving the arts its fair due, but humans are always going to respond to emotion and storytelling. I believe that as much as I ever did. More, even.


Lollapalooza, Waterloo Village, 1991. Photo: Steve Eichner/WireImage
During the peak of Nine Inch Nails’ notoriety, you were one of the culture’s real bogeymen. I remember watching the band’s videos and being sort of scared of you. What was the appeal back then of being shocking?
It might be better phrased to say that my interest was in being subversive rather than shocking. I wanted to see how extreme I could be. I had a bigger audience than I ever expected to have, and around the time of The Downward SpiralReleased in 1994, the band’s second full-length album was simultaneously more aggressive and more interior than Pretty Hate Machine … and marked Reznor’s true entry into the public imagination. , when Jimmy IovineThe record industry bigwig and co-founder of Interscope Records, which handled Nine Inch Nails’ releases from 1992 until 2007. Also co-founder with Dr. Dre of Beats Music, which Reznor has been involved with since 2012. Beats was acquired by Apple in 2014, and Iovine is involved in the company’s streaming-music service.  came into my life, I had the opportunity to make a video with a willing corporate entity. It seemed exciting to take a song like “Happiness in Slavery,”The 1992 video shows a nude man being tortured by a surgery-table-like machine. The video starred the late performance artist Bob Flanagan, who was known for his masochistic performance pieces.  that had zero commercial potential, and use a proper budget to film something that perhaps crossed a line. I was doing my version of something like the magazines you’d find in the back room at the S&M store — opening up portals into cults and behaviors that you didn’t know about. Did the 27-year-old me know it would be shocking if we put out a version of that video where there’s a naked penis and performance artist Bob Flanagan gets ground up? Yes, I knew it would be shocking.

What about something like the fact that you lived and worked in a house where the Manson family killed people? Was that part of the same desire to be subversive?
No. I had to answer questions about that for ten years. I can tell you the story behind recording The Downward Spiral in the Sharon Tate houseThe Los Angeles home where four members of Charles Manson’s cult brutally murdered actress Sharon Tate and four others in 1969. Before its demolition in 1994, Reznor rented the house and used it to record both The Downward Spiral and the Broken EP. He named the studio “Le Pig,” presumably in reference to the fact that one of Tate’s murderers wrote the word “Pig” on the front door of the house in blood. : We were looking for a place to work on the album, and I saw a number of places, and one of them happened to be the house where the Tate murders occurred. But no one told us that.

You can imagine a realtor not wanting to mention that.
I just didn’t know. That place sits up on a hill overlooking Beverly Hills, with the ocean on one side and downtown in the other direction — it was a cool, tranquil little ranch house with a nice yard. And it was cheaper than the rest of them.

That’s always a clue.
I remember having dinner with [music booker] Ian Copeland and he asked where I was going to be in L.A., and I mentioned a house on Cielo Drive. He said, “That’s where the Manson murders took place.” I had read Helter SkelterThe true-crime account of the Manson family murders, co-written by prosecutor Vincent Bugliosi.  as a kid and was freaked out by it; Ian said he had a copy. So we finished dinner, and I got his copy of the book and turned to the pictures in the middle. I’m thinking, Man it would be fucking crazy if it’s the same house. Then I saw a picture that showed a wooden ladder going up to the loft — I’d just gone up there earlier that day — and I thought, Holy shit, it’s the same place. No part of me thought, That’d be cool!

People thought your staying there was contrived.
And it wasn’t. I wasn’t trying to create some manufactured spooky thing. Any shock value to what I was doing was about trying to sneak subversive things to a wide audience. With Marilyn Manson,In 1993, Reznor signed Manson to his Nothing Records label and helped produce Manson’s 1994 album, Portrait of an American Family. He subsequently invited Manson to join Nine Inch Nails on the Self-Destruct tour in support of the Downward Spiral. The 1999 Nine Inch Nails song “Starfuckers, Inc.” is rumored to be about Manson.  who I thought was a great artist back then, he knew exactly what he was doing and exactly what would be shocking. Those were very conscious decisions on his part. What I was doing wasn’t the same thing.

Not that long ago, I read an interview with Eddie Vedder, and he was talking about how one of his kids had listened to a song he’d done and got really upset to hear his dad sound like he was in so much pain.
I know where you’re going with this.

When your kidsReznor married singer-songwriter Mariqueen Maandig in 2009. The couple have four children: Lazarus Echo Reznor, Balthazar Reznor, Nova Lux Reznor, and a fourth whose name is not publicly known.  are old enough to discover songs like “Closer”Either the ultimate sex song or the ultimate argument for the “parental advisory” label. Both the chorus (“I want to fuck you like an animal”) and the video were controversial, but they still aired on MTV (albeit in edited form).  and “Hurt”The third single from The Downward Spiral was nominated for a Best Rock Song Grammy in 1996, and remains one of Reznor’s best-known songs, thanks in part to Johnny Cash, who recorded a haunting cover in 2003.  I assume they’ll have questions. Have you thought about what your answers might be?
I’m not looking forward to the “Closer” talk, which is probably going to happen quicker than I’d like. Just this morning, me and my two older boys were sitting in the hotel restaurant. Their mom has played the new EP for them a couple times. They’re like, “My favorite song is ‘Less Than’.” That’s sweet, but then I’m thinking, Don’t I say ‘fuck’ in that one? Same thing when they were at sound check: What song don’t I say ‘fuck’ in? I’ll tell you another thing I think about: I’m now thrust into adult events — school things with other parents, and just … You’re not really thinking about how lyrics that seemed cool at the time are going to register with parents at your kid’s school 20 years later.

The music that made Nine Inch Nails popular came out of your trying to transcend some dark emotions. Your life is obviously a lot more settled now. Do you find it’s getting harder to generate the feelings that drive Nine Inch Nails?
The first album [Pretty Hate Machine] came out of me being in my early 20s when I knew I had something to say but didn’t know what it was. Before that, I was imitating stuff. I was trying to pretend I was Joe StrummerFront man of the Clash, known for his impassioned stage presence, idiosyncratic vocal style, and righteous political views.  and it felt insincere, because it was insincere. It wasn’t until I’d been keeping a journal and turning those thoughts into lyrics and setting incredibly painful and naked feelings to music that I stepped out in front as myself. That honesty gave Nine Inch Nails a power that carried through the first few records.

And then?
Then you get older. I’m 52.  Somehow that happened.  I don’t feel like I’m 52.

How old do you feel?
Developmentally, I feel like I’m still in my early 30s; my body’s starting to feel like a little older than that. But I’ve found a way to relook at who I am in the context of my music and in the context of the world, not just myself. The world has gotten weirder. Especially politically.

Trump is the question hanging over so many artists right now.
I’ve been struggling with that, especially as far as the live performance and my trying to be a provocateur. I’m sure I’m doing what many people are trying to do in response to the election: understand, quantify, justify, rationalize, find comfort, feel animosity, should I say something? Should I do something? Should I give up?

So have you landed on anything helpful?
Well, the weird thing now is looking at politics as a father. My kids walk in the room and I’ve got CNN or MSNBC on and I have to hit the mute button because I don’t want to get into a discussion about how embarrassing the president is. He’s a fucking vulgarian. Aside from whatever ideological beliefs he has — if he has any — he’s a grotesque person who represents everything I hate. I’m repulsed by everything about him and he’s the president, you know? I haven’t figured out how to rationalize that to my kids’ beautiful little optimistic minds. I grew up in a shitty little town full of Trump votersIn 1994 Reznor told Rolling Stone that Mercer, Pennsylvania, where he grew up, had “nothing going on but cornfields.” , so I think I can I understand the point of view of someone who supports his message. What I don’t understand is supporting that messenger.

On the subject of provocation, I want to ask about something you do in concert. During “Hurt,” the video screen behind the band shows this montage of atrocities: concentration camps and nuclear explosions and prisoners of war being shot in the head. I get that the song is about the pain humans inflict on each other, and the point is to disturb audiences, but ever since I saw you play live, I haven’t been able to shake the feeling that using that kind of imagery in the service of amplifying the emotion of a rock concert is hard to justify. Does that make even a little sense?
It does, but I hadn’t thought about that specific question before. I’ve seen that footage so many times and it’s become part of the canon of what we do in concert. And when we’re playing live, the footage is behind me so I’m not seeing it the way you are. To back up a bit, that footage comes from the video for the song, and we hired a guy, Simon Maxwell,The New Zealand–based director created a handful of music videos in the mid-1990s, including three for Nine Inch Nails.  who licensed the images and put them all together. I liked what he did. I won’t say I didn’t. I would like to say more thought went into it, but honestly, it mostly just felt like a nice way to close parts of the show.

The persona of the “shocking” rock star has pretty much disappeared from the culture. Is that because musicians have become scared of negative attention? Or is there just not much left for a rock star to do that’s shocking anymore?
I’ve thought about this a lot and I don’t have a good answer. I’ll try and piece together a theory with you right now: Something that’s struck me as a significant shift, and I don’t know when it started, is when the corporate entity became a benefactor as opposed to a thing musicians shunned. When I hear Grizzly BearThe Brooklyn indie-rock group’s 2010 song “Two Weeks” was used in a Volkswagen commercial. The previous year, the same song was used in a Peugeot spot.  in a Volkswagen commercial, it kind of bums me out. I like Grizzly Bear a lot; I don’t want to think of a fucking car when I hear their song. But somewhere along the line it became okay to get in bed with a sponsor. More specifically it became okay for rock bands to talk about. When I started to hear musicians talking about their sponsorship deals as something to be almost proud of, it bothered me. I remember having a conversation with a well-known EDMDespite a slippery and debatable definition, EDM has generally come to serve as an umbrella term for beat-driven electronic music made for dancing.  artist. Half of the brief conversation was him humblebragging about how many corporate sponsors he’s got: I can’t do this thing because I don’t want to piss that sponsor off and I can’t do that thing because I need to make sure this other sponsorship deal stays in place. That’s not what the spirit of being a musician or a rock star is. Why are these people even making music? I’m doing it because I have to get something out and I feel vital when it resonates with someone else. When I can get paid, too, that’s a nice consequence.


Woodstock Concert, 1991. Photo: Brian Rasic/Getty Images
Isn’t the financial landscape different for bands now than it was when Nine Inch Nails took off?
The avenues of being able to pay your rent as a musician have changed dramatically. I get it. Do I think it’s bad that a band explores ways to get paid for their music? Ultimately no. But I don’t feel governed by it and I don’t feel restricted about whether or not representing myself in a certain way might close down licensing potential with certain key demographics. Thinking about profits and sponsors is not conducive to strong artistic thinking. I don’t know if I’m just older and not seeing it, but I don’t feel like there are a lot of strong stances out there. One avenue where it seems people are trying to be provocative is by seeing how gratuitously sexy something can be. Take the “Anaconda” video.Sexual imagery in the 2014 Nicki Minaj video included whipped-cream licking, bananas rotating on a turntable, and a lap dance for Drake.  Is that supposed to be sexy? How about we just have full gynecological probing in a video? There’s a vulgarity to it. I don’t know. Maybe lines are being pushed in that way and I’m just blind to it.

While we’re talking about perspective: Most of the other acts you’re playing festivals with this summer are a generation younger than Nine Inch Nails. What do you think you represent to people who didn’t grow up during the ’90s?
Probably the strangest aspect of having a career that lasts is trying to maintain any objectivity about how you’re perceived. We go out and play and I look at the audience, and they look like the same demographic I’ve been seeing for 25 years — maybe the people my age are further away from the stage these days. I don’t know. I’ve just tried to keep the idea of Nine Inch Nails as honest and valid as it can be, where I don’t feel like I’m dressing up as a character that I created years ago and am only doing it for financial reasons. As far as what other people think, I understand that we’re set against a backdrop of rock music being in decline.

Isn’t it?
If you’re asking is rock dead, no, rock’s not fucking dead. It’s not in its most innovative state at the moment, but the feeling — when I say “rock,” I don’t mean necessarily the way it sounds; I mean the attitude, the rebelliousness — that’s not going away. Maybe the promoters of festivals like the ones we’re doing are being cynical and deciding they need a rock band to be one of the headliners. It may be as simple as that, and there’s not many rock bands left, so here we are. It’s like reading reviews — will you allow me to go on a tangent?

Yeah, of course.
Over the last ten years, there’ve been times where I’ve looked in the mirror and thought, Is there an audience out there for what I do? I labor over music that I meticulously create and then release it into a world where music has become disposable. People listen to music while they’re doing something else, you know? The act of even having to go to the store and make the commitment to purchase something is gone and it’s not coming back. It can make me feel a bit like, Is anybody noticing?

Are you asking if anybody’s noticing what’s happened to the way we consume music or if anybody’s noticing the effort you’re putting into Nine Inch Nails?
I think maybe they’re related. We’ll agonize over the most minute of details, and a lot of times we never receive feedback. It doesn’t feel like people live with music as much as they used to, and that music’s role isn’t quite as important as, say, it was to me.

Don’t you think a Lorde fan is just as passionate about her as you were about David Bowie and Pink Floyd? I never quite understand why older music fans assume younger ones are less emotionally engaged with the music they love.
I fully get that. I don’t want to sound like I’m a Luddite clinging to the good ol’ days when life made more sense. I try to put myself in the shoes of someone consuming things in new ways. But in the pre-internet caveman world that I grew up in, the album was an escape, and you read things into that cover artwork. Music became the canvas I could project onto; it became my story of myself. I hope it’s not just a concept to think that music still can perform that function for some faction of the audience.

I think it can be hard to see beyond your own emotional paradigms about this kind of stuff.
Yeah, it’s tough not to veer into a get-off-my-lawn attitude. My complaint — I was thinking about this earlier today for some reason — and it’s not so much a complaint as it is an observation, is that I grew up in a little shitty town outside the range of college radio. I had FM radio, I had Rolling Stone, and later, I had a subscription to Village Voice, which seemed like it came from different world. That kind of cultural isolation made discovering music exciting. When I went to college in the early ’80s and discovered independent record shops, it was like, I’ve got so much catching up to do. I’d never heard of XTC,In fairness, the English post-punk outfit was difficult to keep up with — they released an album almost every year of the 1980s.  then I’d learn they had six albums for me to listen to. I’d never want to discredit the feelings of the 16-year-old who completely relates to Lorde, but there’s something to be said for not having the ability to just skip to the next song, not having endless playlists, not having unlimited choice, not having to choose music over video games and endless television and looking at mindless humblebragging someone is doing on social media about their awesome life. You used to actually have to decide to spend time with music rather than just idly picking it from a plethora of options.

Wouldn’t a music obsessive like yourself have loved having the same choices that listeners have now?
Again, I’m not saying mine was a better era, but a lot of the music I ended up really loving was because I spent nine bucks on an album and that meant I had to listen to it and figure it out. Or maybe I forgot to sign the slip for the Columbia Record Club and they sent me a Billy Joel album I never asked for. Then you get it and you’re like, Oh fuck. But you know what? I listened to that album a thousand times simply because that was the record I’d paid for, and I ended up loving Billy Joel’s 52nd Street.

Basically you’re saying sweat equity matters.
Yeah, it does. I’m not saying there aren’t a million great things about streaming music. Being able to have access to every obscure Frank ZappaThe intensely prolific composer-satirist released 62 albums between 1966 and his death in 1993. album is good; I was never going to hear a lot of them as a teenager, because I didn’t have the money to buy all 600 albums he put out. But I don’t think I’m being a crank if I suggest that maybe there’s some drawbacks to the all-access, all-free world we’re living in.

Is your decision to release EPs When Reznor released Not the Actual Events in December 2016, critics saw it as a return to the sound of 1990s Nine Inch Nails. Some fans, though, were upset that the physical component of the release was an envelope filled with, among other things, mysterious black powder — presumably some sort of clue. In June of this year, Reznor revealed that the EP was part of an interconnected trilogy, the second installment of which, Add Violence, was released July 21.  rather than a full album your version of trying to split the difference between making a big musical statement while also acknowledging that, in 2017, albums are not necessarily the way people make big musical statements?
Let me preface my answer with an old story, very briefly: We were on Interscope Records for a long time. Being there made a lot of sense in the early ’90s. We had a company that was actively trying to support us and promote us. Then as it got into the early and mid-2000s and file sharing decimated things, you found yourself in a very frustrating place as an artist: You were supposed to be angry at fans because they wanted to listen to your music? The feeling of seeing someone get a hold of a record and share it online a month before it was officially supposed to come out is not the same feeling as going to play in Mexico City and seeing a knock-off merchandise village set up outside your show. That thing starts to feel like — not to be mister capitalist guy — but that starts to feel like getting ripped off. File sharing didn’t. File sharing was just people wanting to hear your music.

That’s not how the industry treated it.
The thing is, artists were trained in the 2000s to feel like, “Well, if you’re a fan, you won’t listen to stolen music.” That’s bullshit. You should be grateful that someone’s interested enough in what you’re doing that they’ll go to the trouble of stealing it. The whole premise of how music was delivered in the CD era was stupid. Nobody wanted to buy compact discs. There was a better music shop and it was called Napster or What CD or OiNK.Two popular BitTorrent trackers that allowed users to upload and share audio files, in a similar manner to peer-to-peer networks LimeWire and Napster. Speaking with New York in 2007, Reznor admitted that he was an avid OiNK user, seeing it as superior to iTunes, which he rightly pointed out was, at the time, full of low-quality audio, restrictive copyright protection, and John Mayer’s face.  It was curated better and it had every version of everything you wanted.

I’m not quite seeing the connection to releasing EPs.
Okay, let’s move back to your question: I had all this shit in my head about how people listen to music and consume music. For a couple of years, it’s been full time at Apple immersing myself in this extremely interesting stuff, and doing that has helped me realize how much I appreciate being an artist and how valuable time is. I’m feeling re-energized about music now. I love the format of the traditional album: 45 minutes, the songs support each other, it’s a suite of music, but an EP allows us to be nimble. We can turn one comfortably around in six months, rather than years, and you can use it to sustain moods without getting bogged down in a full-length album. And from my impression of how people listen to music now, being a bit more bite-sized fits into people’s lifestyles better. You put an album out now and it’s reviewed, judged, and forgotten in a weekend. If you’re lucky.

What’d you learn about how people consume music during the years you were off a major label and releasing your music independently?
All my thinking about file sharing sent me down a certain path: We got off Interscope,In 2007, Reznor was public about his feeling that his record label, Interscope, was ripping off fans, going as far as to encourage listeners to “Steal it. Steal away. Steal, steal and steal some more and give it to all your friends and keep on stealing.” After leaving Interscope, Reznor released Nine Inch Nails music via his own Null Corporation label. The band returned to a major, this time Columbia, for the 2013 release of Hesitation Marks.  which was a mutual decision. We weren’t selling enough records to warrant the giant advances that we’d been promised; these were contracts that didn’t see the cliff coming. Anyway, I decided I wanted to be able to engage fans directly without dealing with the bureaucracy of record labels and people trying not to lose their jobs. So I tried things. This would be around the Radiohead In RainbowsRadiohead’s seventh album created headlines as much for its manner of release as its actual music — the band made the album available via its own website, and allowed consumers to pay whatever they wanted (including nothing).  era. Something important happened during those years. Because we went independent, I had to become a marketer as well as a musician. This is when we put out Ghosts and The SlipAfter leaving Interscope, Reznor released both Ghosts I–IV and The Slip independently online, the former for $5 and the latter for free. . It was important that I learned to put myself in the fans’ mindset and live and interact with them and find out what they think is good and bad and what felt cool and what didn’t. So I realized that I could do marketing, but I didn’t enjoy it.

Did you take away anything counterintuitive from that experience? Doesn’t it boil down to don’t rip people off?
Yeah, a lot of marketing and being independent is common sense: attempt to over-deliver; make it clear that there’s a person who cares on the other side of the transaction. But there was a humbling moment that came out of reading bulletin boards and having an ear to the ground. A lot of music fans were saying they’d be happy to financially support a musician if they felt they could get what they want format-wise and that the money would be going to the people who made the music instead of the evil record label.

That proved not to be the case?
We did a record with Saul Williams.Reznor produced the New York rapper’s third album, The Inevitable Rise and Liberation of NiggyTardust!, in 2007, co-writing several tracks (not including the unexpected “Sunday Bloody Sunday” cover).  I probably spent 18 months working on it with him — a real labor of love. We thought he was going to be signed to Interscope, but that didn’t work out. So I said, “Let me use your record as an experiment. I’ll cover the losses if it doesn’t work out.” I wanted to test out a simple scenario. It went something like this: To my database of people, we sent out a message saying, “Here’s a collaborative album I’ve worked on for X amount of time with Saul. Click on this box if you want the full album, not copy-protected, free. I know you can steal it anywhere you want anyway. All I want in return is your email address. Or, click on the box next to it: five dollars; it goes directly to Saul. You can have it for free or you can pay. I’m calling your bluff. Are you going to do the right thing?”

How’d that shake out?
Maybe 30,000 downloads occurred in the next week and less than 20 percent were paid for. I thought that second number would be higher. At the time, I felt I was making a genuine offer, worded simply and confrontationally, for something I thought had genuine value. So I was bummed out by the result. It took the wind out of my sails as far as thinking of direct-to-customer as a sustainable business for a musician. In a way, that experience gave me a preemptive look at music today. You’re not making money from albums; instead they’re a vessel for making people aware of you. That’s what led me to thinking that a singular subscription service clearly is the only way this problem is going to be solved. If we can convert as many music fans as possible to the value of that, in a post-ownership world, it would be the best way to go.

Do you feel like you’ve been successful with Beats and Apple Music as far as working on subscription streaming?
Without going into detail, I’ll say it’s been an education. I’ve been on the other side of artists bitching about payments and free music, and I agree with those arguments, but you can sit and bitch about the way things are, or you can try to affect some change. Working under the Apple umbrella, I have a unique opportunity to work on a streaming service from the inside. I thought I could help set a precedent where artists could actually be paid and the fans could feel like they were dealing with a service run by people who actually care about music.

Is it working?
It’s been interesting. Where it seems to have wound up is that free music is here to stay. It doesn’t seem like, with all the different services, artist payments are coming together in the way that one would hope, but the data is valuable. I didn’t realize Nine Inch Nails had such a huge following in Mexico, for example, until I saw the streaming data — and my primary consideration, above being paid, is that my music reaches the people who are interested in hearing it. Anyway, where were we? I’m not sure how I got so far off track.

Ah, it doesn’t matter. Let’s get back to the new EPs for a second. The packaging of the physical versions of them is incredibly detailed. You can go on Reddit and people are uncovering all these possible clues to the larger narrative hidden in the artwork. It reminds me of the fan response to a show like WestworldThe HBO robots-run-amok drama was was both wildly popular, and sometimes criticized, as a result of its reliance on plot twists and Easter eggs — for example, how a distinctive knife handled by the characters of William and the Man in Black was a clue that those characters were, in fact, the same person, shown at different points in time. , where the creators seemed to encourage people to think of the show as a game full of mysteries to solve. Is the idea behind offering that level of immersion just to provide catnip for online obsessives? I sometimes wonder if people are missing something about art if they’re thinking about it primarily as a puzzle containing definitive answers.
I like the depth. With the new EPs, I liked world-building, and writing music that can sit in that world. I was always the guy who desperately wanted the Dark Side of the Moon to line up withA 1995 article in the Fort Wayne Gazette Journal brought widespread attention to the apocryphal claim that Pink Floyd’s seminal 1973 album, The Dark Side of the Moon, was recorded to intentionally sync up with, and enhance, viewings of the Hollywood classic The Wizard of Oz. Evidence ranges from eerie coincidence (physical actions and cuts happening in accordance with the music) to playful (the Witch of the North entering to the line “Don’t give me that do goody good bullshit”).  The Wizard of Oz. I wanted to believe somebody was so far out of their mind that they figured that out. Fuck, I got goose bumps just thinking about that possibility right now — the idea that someone could be thinking so hard about an album.

Are you ever concerned that the hunt for clues overshadows the music?
Certainly with Year ZeroReznor collaborated with California-based alternate-reality game makers 42 Entertainment to concoct an obsessively intricate marketing campaign for NIN’s dystopian concept album Year Zero, which involved, among other things, hiding USB drives containing unreleased tracks in concert-venue bathrooms.  it did. We went crazy with that album, building a world and telling a story that was mainly meant to provide context for the music. And what happened was that far more attention was paid to what the world was and how that got revealed than was paid to the music. If anyone actually bothered to fucking listen, Year Zero was a good fucking album. I’m not saying every album should be something that invites people down a rabbit hole. I’m just saying I care about context.

I was reading the Reddit Ask Me Anything you did a few years back, and someone was asking questions about the infamous lyric from “Closer”: “I want to fuck you like an animal.” And this person wanted to know if that meant (a) fuck you in the way an animal fucks; (b) fuck you in the way you would fuck an animal; (c) fuck with the level of emotional desire that an animal would feel — it went on. That’s for what I’d thought was a relatively straightforward lyric.
Me too.

So forget the packaging, does it affect the music you create when you know that people are going to be scrutinizing the results like they’re messages from outer space?
What the obsessives maybe don’t know is that if I were to explain everything to you, or just explicitly lay out what the new EP is about, you’d only be disappointed. You don’t really want to know. The experience of grappling with the thing is what makes it interesting, not the immediate gratification of going, “Oh, that’s what it means.”

I read a quote from you once where you said that Nine Inch Nails used to make you feel like a shaman when you played live. I assume that was partly due to what was floating around in your body, but I also assume that’s no longer your experience in front of a crowd. Can you articulate the emotional difference between playing live then and now?
Back then the fuel for the band was rage, and I had to get it out or something bad was going to happen. For some reason I remember a show we played in Tulsa after Pretty Hate Machine came out, opening for Peter Murphy.The front man for goth-rock legends Bauhaus, known for appearing in concert suspended upside down like a sleeping bat.  I’d never been to Tulsa. I didn’t know one person in Tulsa. But somebody in the back of the audience was fucking screaming the whole album back at me and I was thinking, Wow, this is resonating. And as that grew, as we got bigger, I felt like a conduit. We were unleashing something and this energy that I was putting out was coming back at me. It was a magical feeling, and one of the few experiences in my life where I felt like I was in the right place at the right time.

That kind of intensity seems unsustainable.
It didn’t help that I kept getting more and more into drugs and drinking. But that trance — being some degree of fucked up onstage and having that energy exchange with the crowds — it felt like you were in some kind of weird ritual. It was great, and also alienating.

Why alienating?
I remember the feeling of walking off stage at the end of the night, and everyone else is gone, and I’m alone in a back room, and I still don’t feel like I can fit in anywhere — even though I was in an arena full of people that came to see some version of me. It was just weird. And it got even weirder after The Downward Spiral hit and we were playing arenas. You’d meet people and realize you’re not even you anymore. You’re the version of you that they’ve read about. Then you’re thinking, I don’t know who I am anymore either. Am I the vampire I read about in a magazine? Am I acting like I should act? Because no one’s treating me like a normal person anymore. Set those feelings against a few too many drinks a day and a warped scenario starts to emerge.

Did that weirdness change when the popularity dipped?
The FragileNine Inch Nails’ third album, released in 1999, is now considered by many fans to be Reznor’s magnum opus. At the time of its release, the album, recorded during the peak of Reznor’s addiction issues, was considered a commercial disappointment.  didn’t do as well commercially as The Downward Spiral. That’s when you learn humility. When you can suddenly see that the arena has different color seats, and you can only see that because people aren’t sitting in them, it doesn’t feel so good. You think, Is this what it’s going to be like now? Because no one points out the moment that your career changes. Like, “Hey, you know that upward success? It ended yesterday. Time to recalibrate.” That doesn’t happen. Getting sober,Reznor struggled with alcohol and cocaine addiction throughout much of the 1990s, culminating in an overdose in London while touring for 1999’s The Fragile. He cleaned up shortly after.  which happened after The Fragile, that also brought with it true humility: Hey, my career could be over, but I’m alive and I don’t feel like I want to kill myself and I’m not addicted to a substance and I’m not lying to people and I’m starting to feel good about myself. What I found out from being sober was that I actually enjoyed making music more than I did when I was high all the time and playing self-destructive games with myself.

So how does the live show feel now?
It’s different. It’s more about being conscious of trying to perform well and sing well and be in the moment. But the songs have written the role I play, and it’s still a version of me that’s in every one of them. When I sing “Hurt,” which I’ve done countless times and will continue to do, I’m still in those feelings, you know? I’m not saying that defensively. I’ve weeded out the material that isn’t relevant to me anymore.

What’s an example?
Some of the stuff on Downward Spiral. The point of the album was naked emotional outpouring, and now it sometimes feels like it crosses over into eye-roll material.

A lot of the harsh, dense electronic sounds on that album and The Fragile have been absorbed into the mainstream by genres like EDM. Does that make you want to move in different musical directions?
When we go in the studio, the thinking is about doing what feels right for the song. If what we’re doing isn’t the most sonically experimental thing, that’s probably because that’s not what we were setting out to do. As far as responding to what’s happening now, I’ve had many agent types over the years say, “EDM is the future.” No, it’s not. It’s fucking not. I understand why people like it, and if I were 18, I’d love to be listening to it in the Sahara TentAn all-day (and most-of-the-night) dance party at Southern California’s Coachella music festival, where attendees go for intense doses of bass drops and hedonism.  at Coachella, high out of my fucking mind. But it’s not speaking to me at a level that I think has staying power. I’m saying this judgmentally: EDM has certainly changed pop music and is an interesting flavor, but I don’t think anyone’s going to be listening to it in ten years and saying, “What a fucking great song that beat was.” I know saying that is opening me up for criticism.

What makes you hopeful about music’s future?
I still feel like a student who has more musical places to go. I’m in awe of the compositional possibilities still out there. When I work on new music, nine times out of ten, I feel like I’m tuned into something I haven’t explored before. And working on films with Atticus [Ross] is teaching me so much. I’m interested in learning more about traditional orchestration; there’s harmonic exploration I want to do. There are a million rhythmic things I want to explore. My optimism comes from the possibility of expanding my musical brain.

That’s you personally. How about culturally?
It’s interesting to see the chaos of the music-business disruption stabilizing around streaming services. Someone was talking to me about how in the old days of the record industry, there was a system in place: You handed the music over to the label, it came out three months later, then you went on tour. Your job as a musician was more defined. As that framework crumbled, you had to question every bit of what you were doing. Why am I making an album? Who’s getting it? What device are they listening to it on? A lot of things changed — and I think they’re changing again — and I hope that as artists understand more about those changes, maybe it leads to more coloring outside the lines. Maybe people get less concerned about career-first personal survival and exciting music emerges. Not that there isn’t exciting music today, but there’s not a lot that I find sounds radical or has the spark of danger. Or maybe things will just continue like a shitshow and eventually nobody will want to be a musician anymore.

What will they want to be instead?
They’ll go work at a start-up.

Annotations by Gabe Cohn.

This interview has been edited and condensed from two conversations.

TAGS: TRENT REZNOR NINE INCH NAILS MUSIC IN CONVERSATION INTERSCOPE PANORAMA MUSIC FESTIVAL MORE
Share on Facebook
Tweet this Story
Most Viewed Stories
Taylor Swift’s Best Comebacks During Her Cross-Examination at Her Sexual-Assault Trial
In Logan Lucky, It’s Nice to See Daniel Craig Having Fun
Bill Hader Gives You a Bump of Human Cocaine Anthony Scaramucci With His Weekend Update Mooch Impression
What’s New on Netflix: August 2017
The Real Housewives of New York City Season-Finale Recap: Divorce, New York Style
What to Stream Now
See what's new and notable on Netflix, Amazon, Hulu, and HBO
Here’s the Funniest Defense of Guy Fieri You’ll Ever Hear
The Toxic Drama on YA Twitter
New Bachelor in Paradise Trailer Teases Corinne and DeMario Incident and Misconduct Investigation
Watch the Music Video for Jay-Z’s ‘Moonlight’ That Re-creates Friends With an All-Black Cast
The Story Behind the Brilliant Many Endings of Wet Hot American Summer: Ten Years Later
POPULAR VIDEOS ON VULTURE
Ana Gasteyer’s Favorite Vocal Exercise Is Actually Quite Dirty

Promoted links by Taboola
Comments
Latest News from Vulture
1 min ago
The Complete History of Kesha’s Fight Against Dr. Luke
With Kesha’s first album since her sexual-assault lawsuit out now, how did we get here?
9:28 a.m.
The Death of Stalin Trailer: From Russia, With Incompetence
Armando Ianucci heads to Russia in his new dark comedy.
9:24 a.m.
Eric Trump Discovers the Glory of Fidget Spinners on ‘Weekend Update’
Eric Trump is every 11-year-old.
9:00 a.m.
Michael Winterbottom Defends the Startling Twist Ending of The Trip to Spain
“Sh*t, I’m actually going to have an experience.”
1:53 a.m.
Watch the Music Video for Jay-Z’s ‘Moonlight’ That Re-creates Friends
After much anticipation, it’s finally here.
Yesterday at 11:38 p.m.
Watch Bill Hader’s Scaramucci Impression on SNL’s Weekend Update: Summer Edition
The Mooch would be proud.
Yesterday at 11:00 p.m.
Zoo Recap: Baby-Daddy Drama
The world’s least sexy jacuzzi is the latest addition to Zoo Force One.
Yesterday at 11:00 p.m.
Nashville Season-Finale Recap: Kiss Off
There aren’t enough WTFs in the world to describe this episode.
Yesterday at 10:22 p.m.
Seth Meyers Claims Even Trump Is Scared of Trump’s North Korea Threat
“Fire and fury like the world has never seen. Oh, why did the president just say that?”
Yesterday at 8:54 p.m.
Netflix Renews GLOW for a Second Season and Promises More ‘Glitz’ and ‘Guts’
“Here we glow again.”
Yesterday at 7:00 p.m.
Theater Review: Blocks From Trump Tower, Michael Moore Stands Up and Barks
A monologue, mostly to the believers.
Yesterday at 6:06 p.m.
NBC’s Big New Idea Is The Munsters, But in Brooklyn
Seth Meyers is executive producing the reboot along with Odd Mom Out’s Jill Kargman.
Yesterday at 6:04 p.m.
Female Simpsons Writer Says the Show Wanted an All-Male Writers Room
“I found out that Sam Simon, who was the showrunner, didn’t want any women around because he was going through a divorce.”
Yesterday at 5:57 p.m.
2 Dope Queens Is Getting Some Hopefully Dope HBO Specials
Consider this the logical apotheosis of a project that largely serves as a showcase for two very talented individuals.
Yesterday at 5:29 p.m.
American Crime Story: Katrina Gets Overhaul — But We’ll Still Get Sarah Paulson
The installment is also getting new source material.
Yesterday at 5:18 p.m.
Taylor Swift’s Best Comebacks During Her Sexual-Assault Trial
She did not come to play with you, Gabe.
Yesterday at 4:41 p.m.
New Bachelor in Paradise Promo Plays Up Poolside Footage of Corinne and DeMario
No comment.
Yesterday at 2:35 p.m.
Oscar Isaac Was Carrie Fisher’s Waltz Partner on Star Wars: The Last Jedi Set
They’d dance through rebel bases and alien planets.
Yesterday at 2:28 p.m.
Liam Gallagher Sounds Great and Surprisingly Apologetic on ‘For What It’s Worth’
Oasis didn’t break with the past, but that didn’t keep them from breaking with each other.
Yesterday at 12:10 p.m.
Taylor Swift Details Alleged Groping at Trial: ‘He Grabbed My Bare Ass’
Swift said radio DJ David “Jackson” Mueller’s hand “stayed latched on to my bare ass cheek as I moved away from him, visibly uncomfortable.”
Home TV Movies Music Books New On Netflix
  Newsletters   Facebook   Twitter   RSS   Feedly
Privacy Terms Sitemap Media Kit About Us Contacts Feedback We’re Hiring!
© 2017, New York Media LLC. View all trademarks
SECTIONSHomeSEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO NAVIGATIONVIEW MOBILE VERSION
MAGAZINE|How to Make a Movie Out of Anything — Even a Mindless Phone Game
Share
Tweet
Pin
Email
Share
Save

119
119
Cover PhotoCredit Illustration by Brosmind
How to Make a Movie
Out of Anything — Even
a Mindless Phone Game
Hollywood is aggressively adapting material that
doesn’t have a narrative or even any characters.
But not all intellectual property is created equal.

BY ALEX FRENCHJULY 27, 2017
In 2013, a movie producer named Tripp Vinson was thumbing through Variety when he stumbled upon a confounding item: Phil Lord and Christopher Miller, a pair of writers and directors, were working on something called ‘‘The Lego Movie.’’ Vinson was baffled. ‘‘I had no idea where they were going to go with Legos,’’ he says. ‘‘There’s no character; no narrative; no theme. Nothing.’’

A sharply handsome man in his mid-40s, Vinson has worked in Hollywood for 14 years, racking up 19 producing credits. He’s a journeyman producer who specializes in popcorn flicks; over all, his films have an average Rotten Tomatoes score of 30 (out of 100). Vinson may not win Oscars, but he knows how to get his projects into theaters. He has survived and advanced in Hollywood by quickly adapting to trends — what’s selling and what’s falling out of fashion. His filmography reads like a map of Hollywood’s shifting sands.

Vinson has produced a movie starring Pierce Brosnan as an aging master thief (‘‘After the Sunset,’’ 2004); a movie about Coast Guard swimmers with Kevin Costner (‘‘The Guardian,’’ 2006); and a psychological thriller with Jim Carrey (‘‘The Number 23,’’ 2007). He has made two movies about exorcisms, one with Laura Linney (‘‘The Exorcism of Emily Rose,’’ 2005), the other with Anthony Hopkins (‘‘The Rite,’’ 2011); a thriller about a psychic who helps the F.B.I. hunt down a serial killer, also with Hopkins (‘‘Solace,’’ 2015); and a romantic comedy with Anna Faris and Chris Evans, the guy who plays Captain America (‘‘What’s Your Number,’’ 2011). He has even made a dance-­competition movie (‘‘Battle of the Year,’’ 2013).

Since Vinson got into the business, something has changed in Hollywood. More and more movies are developed from intellectual property: already existing stories or universes or characters that have a built-in fan base. Vinson thinks it started in 2007, when the Writers Guild went on strike. ‘‘Before the strike, the studios were each making 20-­something movies a year,’’ he says. ‘‘Back then, you could get a thriller made. After the strike, they cut back dramatically on the number of films they made. It became all about I.P.’’ — intellectual property. With fewer bets to place, the studios became more cautious. ‘‘The way to cut through the noise is hitching yourself onto something customers have some exposure to already,’’ he says. ‘‘Something familiar. You’re not starting from scratch. If you’re going to work in the studio system, you better have a really big I.P. behind you.’’

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE


Review: ‘The Emoji Movie’ Can’t Escape Its Own Idiocy JULY 27, 2017
So over time, Vinson has moved toward making movies backed by intellectual property. He was the executive producer of the so-bad-it-was-good ‘‘Hansel & Gretel: Witch Hunters’’ (2013), which barely broke even domestically but went on to record a worldwide gross of $226 million. He also produced the ‘‘Journey To’’ franchise (‘‘Journey to the Center of the Earth,’’ 2008; ‘‘Journey 2 the Mysterious Island,’’ 2012) based on Jules Verne’s stories, which has been solidly profitable, with a worldwide gross of over $500 million. (A third installment is in development.) He is now working with Disney on a film about Snow White’s sister, Rose Red. And following the trend of taking successful movie concepts to TV, Vinson has started on a serialized version of the Martin Scorsese film ‘‘The Departed.’’

Photo

Credit Illustration by Brosmind
But at least those were stories. Vinson didn’t see how Legos could be the basis of a feature-­length film. He watched in disbelief as the movie raked in $69 million its opening weekend, grossed almost $470 million worldwide and was almost universally lauded by critics. ‘‘It was magical and fresh and really profitable,’’ he recalls. The movie was clever, telling the story of a Lego construction worker caught in a battle between good and evil, which is eventually revealed to be all in the imagination of a boy playing with his controlling father’s Lego set.

Vinson started looking for undervalued I.P. to guide his next movie. He wanted something an audience would already be familiar with, something that was culturally ubiquitous but could be made new again. He started his search in the public domain. He had succeeded with his Jules Verne and Brothers Grimm adaptations, and besides, old material like that had the advantage of being free. Nothing caught his eye.

Next he started looking around for a big-name console video game to acquire. Perhaps something in the mold of ‘‘Lara Croft: Tomb Raider’’ or the ‘‘Resident Evil’’ series, which has made well over a billion dollars at the box office. ‘‘The video-­game companies can be really hard,’’ Vinson says. ‘‘Ubisoft and Activision have their own in-house film-­development arms. A lot of the others are hard to get rights from. They feel like Hollywood can’t figure out how to make a good video-­game title. Why give it to them to have them screw it up? That can hurt game sales.’’ Not only were the companies difficult to bargain with, only a few titles even made sense for an adaptation. Vinson’s analysis revealed that megaproperties like Call of Duty and Grand Theft Auto sold tens of millions of units per installment, but after those top titles, sales dropped to levels that would make an adaptation risky.

So Vinson started looking at mobile games. A cursory investigation revealed that the very best selling mobile games didn’t move tens of millions or even a hundred million units — they could reach into the billions. He happened upon Fruit Ninja, a wildly popular series of games that, since its debut in 2010, has been downloaded well over a billion times. A million people play Fruit Ninja per day. He contacted Half­brick, the company that developed the game.

‘‘The call came completely out of left field,’’ says Sam White, Half­brick’s vice president for entertainment and licensing. The company had already been working on a TV series based on the game, but, White says, ‘‘a Hollywood film was like the holy grail.’’ Vinson found the mobile-­game developers at Half­brick to be more approachable than their console counterparts. They’re usually smaller, younger companies. They see Hollywood as a good opportunity to sell more games. And, most important, they aren’t protective of already existing characters and plotlines — generally because they don’t have any to speak of.

Vinson worked out a ‘‘shopping agreement’’ with Half­brick, a contract that gave him exclusive film rights to Fruit Ninja for a limited period so that he could recruit writers and then take a proposal to the studios. If the project sold, Half­brick would then negotiate a deal to sell the film rights to the studio, a deal that, based on the ubiquity of the game, could run up into the high six figures. Vinson then realized that he was faced with a formidable predicament. There are no protagonists or antagonists in Fruit Ninja. There’s no mythology. No moral. The game play involves staring at a wall as pineapples, watermelons, kiwis, apples and oranges fly up into view. The only thing you do is swipe at the fruit with your finger, cutting them in half. Sometimes there are bombs, and you’re not supposed to swipe at those. ‘‘There’s a fun game to play, but that’s it,’’ Vinson says. ‘‘The challenge was: What the [expletive] am I going to do with Fruit Ninja?’’

This trend toward I.P.-­based movies has been profound. In 1996, of the top 20 grossing films, nine were live-­action movies based on wholly original screenplays. In 2016, just one of the top 20 grossing movies, ‘‘La La Land,’’ fit that bill. Just about everything else was part of the Marvel universe or the DC Comics universe or the ‘‘Harry Potter’’ universe or the ‘‘Star Wars’’ universe or the ‘‘Star Trek’’ universe or the fifth Jason Bourne film or the third ‘‘Kung Fu Panda’’ or a super-­high-­tech remake of ‘‘Jungle Book.’’ Just outside the top 20, there was a remake of ‘‘Ghostbusters’’ and yet another version of ‘‘Tarzan.’’

This year there is more of the same — the third installment of ‘‘XXX,’’ the Smurfs, ‘‘Pirates of the Caribbean’’ (a franchise based on a theme-park ride), a King Kong movie, Thor, the sequel to ‘‘Blade Runner,’’ a remake of ‘‘Beauty and the Beast,’’ ‘‘CHIPS,’’ ‘‘Power Rangers,’’ another ‘‘Star Wars’’ movie, a ‘‘Guardians of the Galaxy’’ sequel, two Stephen King adaptations (‘‘The Dark Tower’’ and ‘‘It’’), ‘‘Wonder Woman,’’ ‘‘The Mummy,’’ ‘‘The War for the Planet of the Apes,’’ a retelling of Agatha Christie’s ‘‘Murder on the Orient Express.’’ Every stripe of intellectual property is represented: from comic books to best sellers; from the public domain to unnervingly recent source material like ‘‘Baywatch.’’

This environment has fostered, in some producers, a sense of desperation. When I asked Vinson if the changes his business has undergone over the past decade have inspired him to panic, he told me: ‘‘Absolutely. It’s forced me to look at everything as though it could be I.P.’’ Increasingly, that means non­narrative I.P.: stuff with big followings but no stories, or even characters, already cooked in.

‘‘The Angry Birds Movie,’’ which was based on a mobile game, was released in 2016 and took in over $349 million worldwide. The game itself consisted of flinging birds at pigs, but it at least provided its writer, Jon Vitti, with protagonists (the birds) and antagonists (the pigs). There was also Adam Sandler’s 2015 movie ‘‘Pixels,’’ a disaster story that united characters from classic 1980s arcade games. Allspark, a subsidiary of Hasbro, has scored two big successes with a pair of movies based on the Ouija board. The first installment, ‘‘Ouija,’’ cost an estimated $5 million to make but managed to earn more than $103 million in the worldwide box office; the sequel, ‘‘Ouija: Origin of Evil,’’ made $81 million on a reported $9 million budget.

Since 2008, Hasbro has been run by Brian Goldner. He founded Hasbro Studios in 2009, creating Allspark soon after. Hasbro has released five Transformers movies, with two more in the works; it has made two G.I. Joe films and has a third in development. Those toys were already made into cartoons in the 1980s, so refashioning them into live-­action movies for adults wasn’t much of a stretch. The same can’t be said for the I.P. that underlies other movies Hasbro has in development — Monopoly and Magic: The Gathering — or for those it is reported to have tried to develop: Candy Land, Hungry Hungry Hippos, Furby, Play-Doh.

Goldner says the key to making movies from board games and toys is to ‘‘focus on understanding the universal truth about the brand.’’ For example, the Ouija board comes with rules relating to its paranormal mythology: Always say ‘‘goodbye’’ at the end of a session; never take it into a graveyard. ‘‘If you remember the movies,’’ he says, ‘‘all those rules are broken — and what results is a very scary situation.’’

If the Ouija films were successful, ‘‘Battleship’’ (2012) offers a cautionary tale about I.P. leading to narrative absurdities. Set off the coast of Hawaii, the film tells of an American Navy crew’s fight against extraterrestrial invaders. The aliens render the Navy’s radar systems useless through some sort of electromagnetic interference, forcing it to employ a grid-­based targeting method — just as in the board game.

The New York Times Magazine
The best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week, including exclusive feature stories, photography, columns and more.

Sign Up
SEE SAMPLE PRIVACY POLICY OPT OUT OR CONTACT US ANYTIME
‘‘Battleship’’ cost over $200 million to make. Domestic box office returns were weak, and the movie was saved only by the nearly $250 million it made internationally. It was a major critical flop too. It wasn’t apparent until well into the third act how the film was actually related to the game. Goldner dismissed all that when we spoke. ‘‘I have people all the time on airplanes tell me that ‘Battleship’ is one of their more favorite action movies,’’ he said. ‘‘Our goal wasn’t to do ‘Battleship’ the way you would do ‘Jumanji,’ with two people playing a board game.’’ (‘‘Jumanji,’’ it’s worth noting, was based on a children’s book about a nonexistent board game; there will be a ‘‘Jumanji’’ sequel released this fall.) He continued: ‘‘It’s not one person yelling out ‘F-7!’ and the other one saying, ‘You hit my battleship.’ It was intended to be about the strategy behind Battleship, about the not knowing what your opponent is doing, about the cat-and-mouse game.’’

This summer’s most prominent example of non­narrative I.P. is ‘‘The Emoji Movie,’’ a film that dramatizes the imaginary lives of emojis. The film’s director and co-­writer, Tony Leondis, told me that ‘‘The Emoji Movie’’ actually began with a quest for some other form of I.P. About two years ago, he was thinking about what his next project should be, and he asked himself: ‘‘What are the newest and hottest toys out there in the marketplace?’’ He looked down at his phone and realized they were right there in front of him: emojis. Everyone uses them.

Unlike board games, emojis don’t have rules to play with. Or mythology. They don’t even exist in the real world. So Leondis created a universe for them: The emojis live inside your phone and are on call 24/7, waiting to be sent to your screen when needed. Each has to make the same expression every time they’re summoned. He created a character, Gene, a ‘‘Meh’’ emoji who is born multi­expressional, violating the rules of the emoji universe. ‘‘The idea that each emoji has one expression only was the key to figuring out the whole story,’’ Leondis told me. ‘‘Then we asked ourselves about the world: What do the apps look like to emojis? What happens when you delete an app? And what would happen if emojis were wreaking havoc inside other apps than their own?’’ Leondis told me that production moved along at a breakneck pace — it was two years from pitch to release. A lot of studios, he told me, think ‘‘The Emoji Movie’’ has the potential to be the beginning of a multifilm franchise.

In his search to find a writer for his Fruit Ninja project, Tripp Vinson reached out to every major talent agency in Hollywood. In March 2016, he was introduced by an agent to the writing duo of J. P. Lavin and Chad Damiani. They have been in Hollywood for 15 years and have worked as partners for that entire span. They have never once had a script make it to the big screen.

Lavin and Damiani, both in their mid-40s, took very different paths to Hollywood. Lavin started as a playwright and earned an M.F.A. from Carnegie Mellon; Damiani was as an announcer for World Championship Wrestling in the 1990s. When W.C.W. was faltering, Damiani moved to Hollywood. Lavin was already there, trying to get his writing career off the ground. The two started thinking about reality-­show ideas. ‘‘ ‘Joe Millionaire’ had just come out. Only the worst ideas were selling,’’ Lavin says. ‘‘All I did was think about terrible reality-­show ideas.’’ The pair came up with a reality competition show called ‘‘Green Card.’’ The concept was simple: An ultra-­nerdy American guy is set up with beautiful contestants flown in from all over the globe, who compete for his affection. The winner receives a green card. (The State Department wouldn’t allow it.) There were other near misses for the duo in the reality field — a competition called ‘‘Jocks vs. Nerds’’ that a producer told them MTV liked so much it had considered putting the show on TV five days a week. (The show never aired.) They developed a hybrid scripted-­reality series called ‘‘Anchorwoman’’ (tag line: ‘‘Would you trust a bikini model to deliver the news?’’) that Fox canceled after its first night.

They also started writing spec scripts together. The first was titled ‘‘WASPloitation,’’ a comedy inspired by Martha Stewart’s prison sentence. Then they wrote ‘‘Terminally Phil,’’ in which a fraternity fools a pledge into thinking he is dying so they don’t get kicked off campus. A zombie-­coal-­mining movie called ‘‘Dead Canary’’ was followed shortly afterward by ‘‘Kamikaze Love,’’ an action comedy about a down-on-his-luck bartender who falls madly in love with a Japanese woman who has been trafficked into the United States to marry a Yakuza boss. Every year, a Hollywood executive named Franklin Leonard conducts a survey of popular but unproduced screenplays called the Black List. In 2007, ‘‘Kamikaze Love’’ made the cut, receiving more mentions by studio executives than many movies that went on to be produced, including ‘‘Slumdog Millionaire,’’ ‘‘The Wrestler’’ and ‘‘The Wolf of Wall Street.’’ Sony Screen Gems bought ‘‘Kamikaze Love,’’ and in the years since, it has been passed from one Sony subsidiary to the next. Lavin and Damiani aren’t totally sure who has it now.

On the strength of that script, Lavin and Damiani started getting commissions to develop other people’s projects, a lot of them involving I.P. Brett Ratner enlisted the pair to write the adaptation to the comic-­book series ‘‘Youngblood.’’ The deal fell apart. They wrote ‘‘Max Steel,’’ based on the Mattel toy property for Paramount. The movie ended up being made, but not based on their script. Warner Brothers enlisted them to write a screenplay for another comic-­book movie called ‘‘Capeshooters.’’ They were attached to a script based on the video game Duke Nukem and another based on the 1964 kids’ book ‘‘Flat Stanley,’’ about a boy who survives being smushed pancake flat and uses his new condition for all manner of mischief.

When they were approached by Vinson, the first thing they did was download Fruit Ninja. Lavin called Damiani after playing for a while. They agreed: There was nothing there. Just fruit. Their work on projects like ‘‘Flat Stanley,’’ though, had shown them that having less to work with provided a greater degree of creative freedom. Lavin and Damiani spent hours discussing the essence of Fruit Ninja. ‘‘For me, it is the messiness, the immediate release of destroying fruit,’’ Damiani told me. For Lavin, the soul of the game is the feeling of ‘‘frenzy.’’ ‘‘There’s like a 60-­second version of it where you can see how fast you can kill fruit,’’ he says, which ‘‘puts your brain in this weird, bizarre focused place.’’ As he sees it: ‘‘This would be the movie to go see stoned. I can imagine going in and seeing it in 3-D — just imagine a 20-foot-high pineapple monster. That shot of yellow and orange. I’d go see this movie a dozen times.’’

While they were developing the movie, Damiani and Lavin were also attending career days at elementary schools in the San Fernando Valley and Hollywood. Sometimes they went to four classes a day. These gave them the opportunity to do some informal market research. Every time they brought up the script they were working on, they found the same reaction. The kids would ‘‘put their hand in the air, raise a finger and start swiping like crazy.’’ Lavin told me, ‘‘Whatever movie we wrote, it had to be an extension of that energy, that desire to tear up everything in your path and take charge.’’

Early on, Lavin and Damiani struggled to find a narrative entry point. They started with the premise that there was a magic book and an evil fruit overlord. Vinson rejected that idea. Their next concept involved scientific experiments on fruit gone wrong. Vinson didn’t like that either. Eventually, a working narrative emerged: Every couple of hundred years, a comet flies by Earth, leaving in its wake a parasite that descends on a farm and infects the fruit. The infected fruit then search for a human host. The only thing keeping humanity from certain doom is a secret society of ninjas who kill the fruit and rescue the hosts by administering the ‘‘anti-­fruit.’’ The produce-­slaying saviors are recruited from the population based on their skill with the Fruit Ninja game. With civilization in imminent danger, a cadre of unlikely heroes materializes — a little boy, a college-­age girl, two average guys. The action starts after each of the story’s heroes returns home after a horrible day and plays Fruit Ninja to relieve some stress. Damiani told me this aligns with the Fruit Ninja brand: ‘‘Anybody can play. Anybody can be a master.’’

With the story intact, Vinson, Lavin and Damiani started ironing out a pitch. They’re known around town for being good in the room. Lavin has a background in theater; Damaini does improv comedy and teaches clowning. Their presentation was 35 minutes — fast moving, full of laughs. ‘‘It felt a lot like how you develop clown work,’’ Damiani told me. ‘‘You play and improvise to keep the energy up — and register what works. I’m always looking for the hot spot — the person giving us the best energy. That might not be the big boss. It might be a junior. Keep them laughing, and it spreads.’’ They estimate that they gave 25 to 30 presentations, five of which were at different film divisions within Sony. They met with four different Chinese companies. To keep their act feeling fresh, they added seemingly improvised asides and digressions. ‘‘If it’s too polished, the execs feel like they’re at a TED Talk, and then you see the eyes go to the window,’’ Damiani says.

Everyone they pitched was enthusiastic, but no one pulled the trigger. ‘‘I love this. Can you come back and pitch it to my boss?’’ was a popular refrain. They presented in a room where an executive laughed so hard that she cried. Still, no one was biting. Three months into the process, they presented at New Line Cinema, a subsidiary of Warner Brothers. New Line always has a strong slate of comedies and horror movies, but family fare hasn’t traditionally been a priority. Vinson didn’t think anything would come of the meeting. This time, however, the decision makers were in the room. And they bought ‘‘Fruit Ninja.’’

This doesn’t mean the movie will definitely be made. There are a million considerations that could affect its production — scheduling, budget, the studio head’s reading the script while in a foul mood. In fact, Lavin said that his project’s future will depend, to a certain extent, on the performance of ‘‘The Emoji Movie.’’ ‘‘We really want to see ‘The Emoji Movie’ succeed, because it’s like proof of concept with these I.P.s,’’ he says. ‘‘But the success of that movie can result in two very different things. Both are a form of enthusiasm. One is: ‘OMG this is happening! We like this script. Let’s get moving.’ Or it can result in: ‘Wow, they did a really great job. Let’s slow down and take a real good look at what we’re doing with ‘‘Fruit Ninja.’’ ’ ’’

The paths that ‘‘Fruit Ninja’’ could take from here are practically infinite, anything from being spiked to having the Lego franchise’s wild success, which is perhaps best embodied by Bricksburg, the 15,000-­square-­foot facility in Hollywood where the producer Dan Lin was part of a team that created the entire Lego universe. It is a shrine to everything Lego — there’s a cactus made of Legos, a Lego bat signal — and to the possibilities of non­narrative I.P. This year has brought the release of ‘‘The Lego Batman Movie,’’ which will be followed by ‘‘The Lego Ninjago Movie’’ and, in 2019, by a sequel to the first film.

I visited Bricksburg earlier this year, and Lin, who is 40-­something but looks 20-­something, joined me at the end of the tour. He invited me into a secret room, tucked down a small passageway hidden by a trap door next to a water cooler, where he and his colleagues go for device-­free brainstorming. He told me about how he came up with the idea for ‘‘The Lego Movie’’ in 2009, after watching his 5-year-old son playing with the bricks — the sound effects and dialogue, the way he made those pieces zoom around the room. The company was interested, he discovered, in expanding their reach with children as they enter their teenage years, which they called, Lin said, ‘‘the dark ages.’’ Lin wanted to make something his son could watch. What resulted felt lightly subversive — the villain is named President Business — but also managed to uphold the basic tenets of the Lego brand: imagination, free play, creativity.

Lin didn’t know when he was making ‘‘The Lego Movie’’ that it would inspire so many other movies based on toys, games and apps. When I last spoke with him, over the phone, I got the sense that birthing an entire generation of cynically made movies weighed on him. Companies call him all the time, he told me, asking if he can do for their company what he did for Lego. ‘‘You know, 95 percent of brands are not Legoizable,’’ he said. When I told him about the Fruit Ninja script, he let out a little gasp. ‘‘Oh, my gosh,’’ he said. ‘‘Who’s making that?’’

Correction: July 27, 2017
An earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of an actress. She is Anna Faris, not Farris.

Alex French is a contributing editor at Esquire. He last wrote for The Times Magazine about the plot to take down the Fox News analyst Wayne Simmons.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

A version of this article appears in print on July 30, 2017, on Page MM30 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Not-So-Intellectual Property. Today's Paper|Subscribe

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE
Review: ‘The Emoji Movie’ Can’t Escape Its Own Idiocy JULY 27, 2017

TRENDING


News Analysis: Wrestling With North Korea, Trump Finds Perilous Options

Trump Says Military Is ‘Locked and Loaded, Should North Korea Act Unwisely’

Op-Ed Columnist: Sundar Pichai Should Resign as Google’s C.E.O.

Meet Kim Jong-un, a Moody Young Man With a Nuclear Arsenal

On Washington: Trump’s Twitter Fury at McConnell Risks Alienating a Key Ally

Best of Late Night: Seth Meyers Thinks ‘Fire and Fury’ Has Something to Do With the Opioid Crisis

Op-Ed Columnist: The Axis of Climate Evil

What Can North Korea Reach With Its Missiles?

Jeffrey Lord, Trump Defender on CNN, Is Fired for Using Nazi Slogan

Review: Woody Harrelson as a Wild and Crazy Dad in ‘The Glass Castle’
View More Trending Stories »

What's Next
Loading...
Go to Home Page »
SITE INDEX THE NEW YORK TIMES

Site Index Navigation
NEWS

World
U.S.
Politics
N.Y.
Business
Tech
Science
Health
Sports
Education
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION

Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Contributing Writers
Op-Ed Contributors
Opinionator
Letters
Sunday Review
Taking Note
Room for Debate
Video: Opinion
ARTS

Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING

Automobiles
Crossword
Food
Education
Fashion & Style
Health
Jobs
Magazine
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Real Estate
T Magazine
Travel
Weddings & Celebrations
LISTINGS & MORE

Reader Center
Classifieds
Tools & Services
Times Topics
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Blogs
Multimedia
Photography
Video
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Subscribe
Manage My Account
NYTCo
SUBSCRIBE

 Home Delivery
 Digital Subscriptions
 Crossword
Email Newsletters
Alerts
Gift Subscriptions
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Site Information Navigation
© 2017 The New York Times Company HomeSearchAccessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.Contact UsWork With UsAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite Information Navigation
Site MapHelpSite FeedbackSubscriptions
Necessary Fiction
Fiction
Reviews
Research Notes
Translation Notes
Interviews
About


FICTION · 07/19/2017
For Science

by Marléne Zadig
It’s an honor for me to even have been invited to this seaside post mortem exam. I’m only a second-year grad student, and the next lowest ranking academic to attend the cetacean necropsy is a post-doc from my department named Ismael. He’s the one who invited me, and I am grateful for the opportunity — I truly am.

I thought we might all recite an invocation or prayer over the bloated and deceased body of the blue whale cow before us, or at the very least a non-denominational Earth blessing, but instead my fellow marine mammal researchers mount the carcass like a creature on a carousel. Flensing knives at the ready, they straddle the dead animal and grin for group photos as if it were merely a fiberglass representation of a whale. Granted, it’s a rare and vital opportunity for those in our line of work, but the optics of it make me dizzy, as though I’ve sipped too much helium from latex balloons at a children’s birthday party.

Ismael observes my unease and herds me over to a tide pool to suggest that I reel in those notoriously volatile feelings of mine.

“We’re scientists, Sequoia. It’s not like we killed the whale, and we can learn a lot from its demise. We can’t let sentiment interfere.”

I hadn’t started sleeping with Ismael for career reasons, but given that he was the favored protégé of our mutual advisor, I’d lately realized — perhaps a little too late, I’ll admit — that things could go abruptly south for me if (or really, when) I ever wanted to stop sleeping with him.

“Right-o,” I reply and cock a salute — fake British accent included — which renders me ridiculous, I know. “Stiff upper lip will be henceforth deployed!”

He cringes, and I hope he doesn’t think I am making some sort of a veiled Moby Dick reference, an understandable pet peeve of his given his name and occupation. In all my straining to remain cool and blasé about our affair I know I am failing magnificently and drawing unwanted attention to myself to boot, the way a swimmer gets pulled under by a riptide the harder she tries to break away, but I can’t help being awkward.

Everyone knows, of course. How could they not know, in a department this small? We hooked up last year at the holiday party. We’d both been sloshed, and he’d leaned into me at the punch bowl to smell my shampoo and said, “Don’t you want to find out if we fit together? For science?”

His lips and tongue seemed bruised from all the grenadine.

“Sure,” I’d said in reply. “Why not.”

I’d thought it would be a one-night stand or a quick fling, but soon after it all began he’d declared us “fuck buddies for life,” which seemed like a contradiction in terms. But Ismael is the king of mixed messages, the emperor of ambiguity. Serious / not-serious. Joking / not-joking.

To reach the whale’s vital organs, the team needs to carve deeply with the whaling knives to fashion a gargantuan rectangle, then hook the open end to a cable connected to a winch on the back of a pick-up truck and crank it backwards until it unfurls like a banana peel. I’m not squeamish, but the blue whale before me is now red and radiating a powerful heat from the rapid decomposition taking place inside, the microbes converting all that calorie-rich blubber into thermal energy. It is like standing by a furnace that’s covered in reeking soiled clothes spread out to dry.

All at once there is a sudden variance in pressure from piercing the seal and the body expels something large and unexpected into the approaching surf. It’s another dead whale, this one much smaller, about half the size of a newborn calf. The body is all white and perfect looking, though deflated, like a discarded rubber exam glove bobbing on the open waves. The fetus was perhaps only six months into its twelve-month gestation, but it is still larger than your average human five-year-old.

“Oh man,” Ismael hums, glancing my way. “This is post-doc pay-dirt.” His eyes bulge into uncanny white orbs as he regards the lifeless remains.

Oh.

It hits me with a satisfying thunk somewhere in my body — perhaps my spleen — the same way it feels to press that final, elusive shape into a 5000-piece jigsaw puzzle. Oh — he is an asshole.

I mean, I’d suspected this before, but here it was suddenly independent of my own flaws or character. He has always been an asshole, yes, but now objectively so. I am slightly giddy from the discovery, light-headed from a feeling of release, and swoon as though I might faint in the waves.

I glance around at the crowd of researchers and perceive a subliminal rift in their various reactions. Some seem about to cheer but restrain themselves out of tact, others mourn, and still others try mourning first, then celebrating after. One research fellow — Jenny, I think her name is — scrunches up her eyebrows in a grotesque grimace, half-ready to laugh or look away, as if she were watching a hot-dog eating contest where the winner seems about to hurl.

“Good lord, that startled me!” Jenny cries, hand to her chest. “The last time I came to one of these, the carcass flat-out exploded from the pressure and burst right open in our faces.”

“Really,” is all I manage to say. The water laps at my calves and I feel myself involuntarily start to sway.

“Are you okay?” Jenny asks. “You look like you’re about to pass out.”

+

The second, more recent termination of my own pregnancies had been more difficult than the first because of the sense that it should’ve been avoidable somehow given how unpleasant the first time had been. But Ismael is Catalonian and claims this makes him macho, in that he refuses to wear a condom but persists in having sex, and I have various pre-existing conditions including rheumatoid arthritis and a history of blood clots that make most medical birth control options difficult if not impossible, and so we arrived at the so-called rhythm method, though it turns out that I’m not very rhythmic, reproductively or otherwise. I can’t dance either.

When I’d emerged from the bathroom in his apartment that first time after the initial round of cramping, he’d arranged a set of absorbent pee pads across his couch for me to lie down on. The kind used for potty training puppies.

“I’m wearing a maxi-pad big enough for a gorilla,” I told him.

“Well, in case you leak,” he said.

I accidentally sliced my finger the other day with a chef’s knife while slicing an onion, and it struck me in the moment that the two experiences progressed in a similar fashion. First there is the catch of breath and involuntary crying out. Then the waiting period, during which you hang numbly in a limbo of suspense and uncertainty — has it truly happened or was it only imagined? Then comes the clutching, the squeezing, the certainty of what’s to come. Then — finally — there is the long-awaited (or so it seems, anyway) seeping pool of blood.

After we picked up the medication the second time, I drove us back home, but to my place this time. He sat there in the passenger seat scanning the package as if he were carefully scrutinizing the instructions.

“I forget — how long before we can have sex again after this?”

I looked around the dashboard in the ridiculous, futile hope of a hidden camera recording our conversation for posterity, but there of course wasn’t one. It must be me then; I must be crazy.

You would think that that comment alone — or any of the other myriad slights over the last several months — would have been enough for me to call it quits, even with the risk to my standing in the department, but I didn’t really hear him. Or I heard him, but it turns out that the more awful he was the more I felt that things were as they should be. That his treating me like shit was merely evidence that I was, in fact, a shitty human being. That he was exactly the man I deserved.

+

I turn and move away from the team through the shallow water hissing up the beach in the low tide. My trousers are wet and my shoes fill with mud, so it is slow going, plenty of time for Ismael to venture after me if he is so inclined but he isn’t. Instead, I hear him whooping and hollering behind me after that white whale that never was, like a hyena approaching a lion’s kill, and I am glad.

As I move farther away from the carcasses toward the parking lot, I am reminded of something I read as an undergraduate on the history of the whaling industry. The wives of whalers were left alone for years, and to encourage fidelity while they were away, husbands sometimes presented their wives with porcelain dildos from China. Only, the picture in the article depicted one found in Massachusetts that was made of plaster, suggesting it was homemade, perhaps by the wife herself. The head of this plaster dildo was peculiarly stained a deep reddish purple, a color which incidentally matches precisely the inside of a whale — maybe, too, a woman.

I trudge up the sand dunes picturing this 19th-century abandoned housewife seated before an earthen bowl with her sprinkling of lime, a cup of cement, and a pour of warm water from a jug — not realizing at first what she intended to make, exactly — then kneading the dough of it with cracked fingers into the particular size and shape that pleased her. What sort of smile must have graced her lips? What songs must she have sung, then? In my mind, the woman croons in a soft contralto: “Glory. Glory hallelujah.”

+++

Marléne Zadig wants to go to the moon and figure out lucid dreaming. Meanwhile, she lives in Berkeley and writes fiction, which is almost the same. Her work appears in places like StoryQuarterly, Slice, Joyland, Michigan Quarterly Review, and in the aggregate at marlenezadig.com. She’s a runner-up for both the 2017 Literary Awards at The Pinch and the 2016 StoryQuarterly Fiction Prize and is in the midst of writing a novel about wildfire.
Share This
GQ
StyleGroomingWomenEntertainmentT&ECultureVideo
Subscribe Now
Get the Magazine
NewsletterSearch

E-mail Address
SUBMIT
Search
SEARCH
The New Rules For Making It In Hollywood

Celebrity
The New Rules For Making It In Hollywood
Illustrations by Eddie Guy
BY ZACH BARON
July 24, 2017
For a young actor in 2017, the good news is it’s never been easier to get a job. There are now a million options—as long as you’re cool with getting “famous” on go90. Or Crackle. Or Freeform. The list of platforms keeps growing, while the screens keep shrinking. Zach Baron reports on a generation of would-be stars navigating an era of glorious upheaval—when that next phone call might be from Netflix. (But it’s probably from Seeso.)

1. You May Someday Work for Something Called Crackle
Beau Mirchoff is currently filming a movie called Party Boat. “It’s about a party boat,” he says. Beau is 28, with a puffy, amiable head of hair and mischievous eyes. He’s been acting professionally since he was 14. In 2006, he was in Scary Movie 4—that was kind of his big break. Later, he had a five-year run on MTV’s high school sitcom Awkward. He acted opposite David Duchovny on Aquarius, for NBC, and opposite Selena Gomez, when they were both younger, in Disney’s The Wizards Return: Alex vs. Alex.
He paces in his trailer on the Party Boat set down in Atlanta, where rain has been wreaking havoc with the shooting schedule. Party Boat is being made by a company called Crackle. Beau is the first guy to tell you he didn’t entirely know what Crackle was a year ago. Well—he knew it was the thing Jerry Seinfeld’s Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee was on. He loves that show, he says.
“So that’s the extent of my knowledge of Crackle,” Beau says. “But they had a really funny script, the character is awesome, they have great people attached—it was like, ‘Let’s do it. Why not?’ ” He peers out of his trailer and sees the same movie set he’s seen a dozen times before. “In terms of filming it, there’s nothing different between this film and another little film. You have the same departments. Same stuff.”
Life as a young actor in Hollywood has always been characterized by some degree of helplessness and confusion—the sense that somebody somewhere with more money than you can fathom is deciding your destiny. But 2017 feels unusual, somehow. At a moment when the entertainment industry has never seemed more crowded and confusing, more vibrant and more diffuse, guys like Beau are still trudging into audition rooms, reading sides, and ending up on movie and television sets…but now, sometimes, they’re making content for platforms that even they haven’t heard of. They’re getting calls from outlets that they didn’t even know existed.
“I’ve been a talent agent now almost 30 years,” says Maury DiMauro, one of the heads of Innovative Artists and who helped discover Channing Tatum and Amanda Seyfried. “The first 20 years were really very traditional: You look for actors in a school and you guided them in classes and programs, and get your head shot, and you sent them out in a traditional route. There isn’t a traditional route anymore.”
So guys like Beau are learning as they go. Crackle, for what it’s worth, is a streaming-content studio currently owned by Sony—not unlike go90, which is the proprietary streaming service owned and distributed by Verizon; or YouTube Red, the original-programming arm of YouTube; or Seeso, which is Comcast’s version. Last December, Facebook announced that it would begin buying and producing its own programming. Apple aired its first TV series, Planet of the Apps, starring Gwyneth Paltrow, Jessica Alba, and will.i.am, in June. These are the laboratories—the places where smart and/or risk-tolerant executives are playing around, trying to figure out what a show or a movie can be in 2017.
Then there are the streamers that have increasingly come to resemble, and at times have begun to replace, Hollywood’s traditional studios. Hulu is the one that has The Handmaid’s Tale and Difficult People. Amazon was nominated for an Oscar for Manchester by the Sea and won a Golden Globe for Transparent. Netflix is spending $6 billion on original content this year to make sure it’s mentioned in paragraphs like this one. Traditional movie studios and network television also remain, in various states of success and dysfunction.

TRENDING THIS VERY SECOND


Style
Lewis Hamilton Is Proof You Should Never Swim in Mesh Shorts

Entertainment
The 'Matrix' Directors' Most Ambitious Movie Is Now On Netflix
And anytime any of these studios or streamers decide they want to put a show or a movie on the air, or in theaters, or on the Internet, or on a cell phone, they need what you’ve always needed. A script, usually. A director, almost always. And actors. I wondered what the new Hollywood looked like to those actors—the professionally beautiful people on the front lines. It’s why I wanted to talk to Beau. To try to make sense of what’s going on with his chosen profession, to the extent that anyone has any idea. He’s been doing this for 14 years, whatever this is. How has it changed?
When Beau was starting out, fresh off the ferry from Victoria, British Columbia, he took some of the money he made off a film called The Grudge 3 and bought a beat-up 1995 Plymouth Neon. The car had no air-conditioning, so during pilot season he’d drive around Los Angeles in his underwear with only a spray bottle of water for comfort and all his clothes hung up in the backseat. Then he’d hastily dress in order to attend audition after audition, in the manner of young men in Hollywood going back to the days before they had air-conditioning or Plymouth Neons.
Now, Beau says, pilot season doesn’t really exist. The three months at the beginning of the year in which TV did most of its casting have been replaced by something less manic but more unceasing: “You’re just getting barraged all the time. I have a pilot audition tomorrow that I have to put on tape. There’s this Amazon pilot. You no longer know when it’s going to be.” Or what, for that matter. “I feel like there are less big-studio auditions, for sure,” Beau says, thinking out loud. “Now they make $100 million movies, right? I rarely go out for those things. Because they’re usually straight offers, because they want the Brad Pitts of the world. So now it’s the lower-budget movies, but there’s a lot more of them. You have these smaller movies, which the non-Brad Pitts of the world get to do. And they’re more human stories, which I think is really cool.”
So that’s another thing Beau’s noticed—more interesting roles, albeit often in previously unknown or unglamorous places. Things that are often obscure but pay well, even a premium in some cases, because they have to in order to attract talent, and because they’re being backed by giant cash-rich companies. “I’ve been getting interest from YouTubers to do certain YouTube video stuff. Also, like, Verizon go90 stuff, which is literally on a cell phone.”
He brightens at this thought, the reminder that there is now no device or medium that someone won’t pay millions of dollars to put a sitcom or movie on. “There’s so many different avenues now.” Life as a working but not entirely famous actor, long a nebulous and tenuous career path, seems more stable and sustainable, Beau says. Less Plymouth Neon, more Audi A3.
2. Social Media Is a Shortcut…But You Still Need Disney If You Want to Be in a Marvel Movie
On a sunny May afternoon in Hollywood, Jake Paul wanders into a restaurant on Franklin Avenue wearing the slouchy, all-black silhouette that is the default uniform here for young men who admire Kanye West. His hair is specifically tousled. He’s 20 years old. From a table in the corner, he orders a kale salad and a glass of water. He just came from the set of his Disney show, Bizaardvark, on which he plays a social-media star, which is apt, because that’s what Jake Paul is.

Two and a half years ago, he moved to Hollywood from Cleveland. Back when Vine was a thing, he and his elder brother, Logan, would regularly post videos there of themselves shirtless or dancing or glued together shirtless while dancing, and by the time he was 16, he had millions of followers and a substantial income from the advertising dollars they helped generate: “We were making more money than our parents, so we knew that something was here. People were reaching out to us, saying, ‘Come to Hollywood, like, star in this movie.’” So eventually they did.
By the time he got to Hollywood, Jake was already famous, in a way, but he didn’t know much about acting. So he started taking improv classes. “The way I saw it was, if I had the built-in following and the audience, but I also had the skill set of acting, that would shoot me to the top,” he says. “Because there’s so many good actors. There’s so many good-looking people. But the X factor now is social media.”
He attempts an analogy. “Like—reverse-engineer Hollywood is how I think of it. All the social-media stars are going in the back door, and everyone’s trying to get in the front—there’s a line outside. And then everyone’s trying to sneak around back, but then there’s security, you know? That’s an analogy, I guess.” After all, he says, Hollywood’s a business like any other. “Why would they cast someone with the same acting capabilities who doesn’t have the followers? They’re not going to make as much money.”
After Vine folded, Jake and Logan continued to upload videos to YouTube, where Jake’s channel now has more than 7 million subscribers, which is more viewers than, say, Atlanta gets on a weekly basis. Jake knows this—that he has leverage in an industry that has traditionally delighted in sending guys like Jake back to Cleveland the second they start using words like “leverage.” “Even Disney—off the record, but on the record—knows that I have the power,” he says. “They love me because of that. I don’t act like it. I’m not walking around all cocky, but the tables have turned.”
His kale salad arrives. He re-arranges some kale leaves on his plate. “The videos that I post every day are averaging 7 million views per day,” he says. “And I post one of those a day. I spend an average of $200 a day to make that. The Disney show that I’m on, they spend $2 million over the course of five days to create one episode that gets 1.7 million views. [Neither YouTube or Disney would confirm these numbers. This past weekend, Jake left Bizaardvark, after finding a new kind of viral fame as the subject of a potential neighborhood class action nuisance lawsuit.] Which is why all of these studios are scared and all these Disney channels are scared—they’re getting cut out of the picture.”
So why bother to work with Disney at all?
“It’s an old model, but it’s a model that’s still very important,” he says. “And they’re making more money off their 1.7 million views than I am off of my 7 million.” Someday soon, Jake says earnestly, he believes all of this will merge, and there won’t be social-media stars and regular movie stars but some seamless combination of the two. Hopefully in the person of Jake Paul himself. A year ago, he says, he auditioned for the new Spider-Man movie. Just the other day he went in for X-Men.
“I want to be a superhero or a super-villain in a giant action film,” he says. “I love Bane. I love the Joker. I love Batman. I want to do that. That would be a dream come true.”
Jake says the last time he was on a movie set was just a few months ago, when he shot his own movie, Airplane Mode, which he describes as “The Expendables with social-media stars.” He raised $2 million from Ron Burkle and Jonathan Ornstein, he says, and put all of his friends, who are also social-media stars, in it. “There was more than half a billion followers out of everyone who was in the movie. So if we sell to 1 percent of them, that’s $50 million in sales and so it’s like that’s how they see it, right? That’s a pretty good example of how this space is changing and where it’s going.” He says they’re having a buyers’ screening of Airplane Mode soon. He wonders aloud what the film might be worth. “Like, is it going to make $5 million? Is it going to make $10 million? Is it going to make $50 million, a hundred?”
Jake says he’s constantly in meetings where people pitch him on projects like Airplane Mode or try to get him to act in their movies. He’s got a meeting with a producer coming up, in fact, at his agent’s office at WME. Maybe I’d like to come?

3. Constantly Reminding People You Exist Is Now Part of the Job
Keith Powers has been mostly lucky so far. The second movie he ever shot was Straight Outta Compton—he played Dr. Dre’s brother. The first TV show on which he was a regular, MTV’s Faking It, ran for two seasons after he joined it. Right now he’s on a show with Bella Thorne called Famous in Love, on the Freeform network, which is what ABC Family became.
A few years ago, he was modeling in California; now he’s got a real career, and that’s a blessing. But modern-day fandom is weird, he says. You’re not allowed to disappear anymore, or maintain any amount of mystery. Fans talk to him on Twitter and Instagram all day, and mostly what they say is: Work more.
“That’s why my whole thing was to be on a TV show,” Keith says. “I’m not going to lie: These days I feel so much pressure from my supporters. I feel like: If I’m not giving them work? Nowadays kids don’t live with stuff. People used to live with an album. Michael Jackson put out Thriller and, what, five years later, he put out Bad? He was a whole different person. Literally, he had a whole different skin color.”
That kind of scarcity used to be the model—successful actors like Tom Hanks would do one or two films a year, and that was it. The rarity of it was a kind of power. But Keith says it’s no longer enough just to act and be part of great projects. You have to do it constantly. It’s why so many actors are moving toward TV—not just because they’re following the creative talents who increasingly work there, but also because TV puts them on screens consistently in a way that, say, an indie movie that shows at Sundance and then a few times in New York and L.A. does not. Actors, like everyone else now, have brands to consider and maintain. That’s exhausting, particularly so in an era where people tend to binge-watch.
“Famous in Love dropped—they watched Famous in Love in one week,” Keith says, sighing. “Then they’re like: ‘Okay, Keith, what’s next?’ I’m like, ‘Oh, my God. That’s crazy.’ They don’t live with stuff. They see it and ask what’s next.”
4. Netflix Is the Biggest Thing Currently Out There
“Fucking helicopters!” Arturo Castro says, sitting in the lobby of the Bowery Hotel. He’s just back in New York after going down to Colombia to shoot Netflix’s Narcos, and he’s trying, with some degree of incredulity, to describe what the set was like. “We have these shoot-outs, man.…”
It’s a warm day and he’s drinking iced tea, louche and handsome. A couple of weeks ago, Amy Schumer’s Snatched, his first big-studio comedy, came out. For the past few years, he’s starred on Comedy Central’s Broad City as Ilana Glazer’s drug-dealing roommate—still the role he’s probably best known for.
“I don’t know if the career I’m having right now would have been possible ten years ago,” Arturo says. Back then, when he graduated from acting school, there wasn’t anything like Broad City for a short Guatemalan actor to star on, he says. “I couldn’t get a TV audition to save my life.”
Broad City, which began on the Internet, gave him an outlet when none of the conventional studios would. “It’s a little oversaturated now that everybody has a web series,” Arturo says. “But back when we started on it, that was a stroke of brilliance.” He channels Broad City co-creators Glazer and Abbi Jacobson: “Like, ‘You know what? The work out there is not something that either appeals to me or is something I’m right for at the moment. Why don’t I write something for myself or write my own point of view?’ It was kind of the first show that really became successful through that.”

“I went into an audition a few weeks ago, and the first thing they asked me was how many followers I had.”
Broad City felt like a breakthrough for Arturo when it happened, and it was: After Comedy Central picked up the show, he was suddenly on every basic-cable package in America. But the scale of Netflix, Arturo says, is bigger than anything he’d encountered—including the Ang Lee war epic he starred in last year, Billy Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk. “It’s crazy. That’s the difference I saw with the streaming world: The budget was just probably way bigger on Narcos than everything I’ve worked on put together. It’s a ten-hour movie with millions of dollars in production.”
Netflix currently spends a preposterous amount of money producing original content, in part because its distribution network is so vast. The company is in hundreds of countries around the world, which is why actors of all levels gravitate toward its content. “They don’t have Comedy Central in Guatemala,” Arturo says. “So for all these years that I’ve done all this stuff, nobody’s seen me in anything. To the point where my mom’s like, ‘So…how’s it going out there?’ And they love Narcos, and Netflix is this worldwide event. Millions of people see it. And that to me is one of the coolest parts, not just the exposure, but you want people to see the work and you want people to relate to the work, and you also want your parents to know that you’re actually doing something. Just the exposure level is a big difference between cable and a juggernaut like Netflix.”
5. Meryl Streep Didn’t Have to Worry About Followers, But You Do
Paris Berelc’s endearing dream is to one day do her own stunts in an action film like her hero, Angelina Jolie. Like so many actresses before her, Paris was a model first. Growing up outside Milwaukee, Paris, who has a round, earnest face, did shoots for Sears and Kmart. Then she got bored and started looking toward Los Angeles. Right before she arrived, she got cast on a Disney show, Mighty Med. “And then now I just booked Netflix: Alexa & Katie,” she says—the streaming service’s upcoming family-oriented comedy.
Paris says she’s acutely aware of all the people who have come to Hollywood the way she has, through modeling and Disney. She’s also aware of how different things are now from how they were then. For instance: social media. She has more than a million followers on Instagram, which is what happens to you these days when you’re a young person on a Disney show. This is an ambivalent prospect for her, though. Unlike Jake Paul, she’s an actress first—or at least that’s how she thinks of herself. And yet sometimes it seems like her success depends on things that have nothing to do with acting at all.
“When it was Britney Spears and Justin Timberlake, or I guess you could even go back to Miley or Selena, but even further than them, I don’t think social media was such a big impact on this kind of world,” Paris says. “Britney and them—it didn’t matter about followers or if they’re verified on social media. And I think now it’s a little different because social media is such a great impact, and how many followers you have is a really big impact on whether or not you get a job. Like, I went into an audition a few weeks ago, and I walked in, and the first thing they asked me was how many followers I had.”
“Sometimes walking around with a lot of YouTube personalities that I hang out with, fans are going nuts over them and have no clue who Leonardo DiCaprio is.”
Really?

“And I looked at them, and I was like, ‘Wait. What?’ I did my slate. I was like, ‘Hi, I’m Paris Berelc. I’m five-four,’ whatever. Then they stopped me and they’re like, ‘Wait, how many followers do you have on Instagram?’ And I was like, ‘I don’t know? Like 1.2 mil?’ And then they were like, ‘Okay, yeah, can we do the slate again, but can you just say that at the end?’ ”
What were you auditioning for?
“I think it was an independent film that was looking for funds or something, because people with followers will bring those funds in. Because a lot of my friends, who are also on Disney, were also in the room. And then once we all left, we met outside, and I was like, ‘All right. Was the first thing they asked you how many followers you had?’ And they said yes. It’s so weird. I think it’s very unprofessional. I don’t like it. That’s the part of the social-media thing that I’m not a big fan of. For someone like Meryl Streep, it didn’t matter—I mean, they didn’t have to worry about followers or anything before. It was purely about their acting. And I guess I just kind of missed that part.”
In high school, before she came out here, she was a gymnast. “I still train and do stunt training to keep up with it because action and stunts are something I really want to break out into film.” She says she plays the game, in terms of maintaining a social-media following, because she has to, and because it does help bring new viewers, at least theoretically, to the things she acts in. But what she really wants to do is hang off the side of a building in an action flick.
6. You Don’t Need to Do Film Anymore—But Now on TV You’re Competing with Nicole Kidman
Keiynan Lonsdale was supposed to be a big movie star, and maybe he’ll still be one. A small key dangles from his left ear and glints in the light that comes in through the windows of his publicist’s conference room, a few floors up off Sunset Boulevard. He’s wearing a tucked-in long-sleeve PlayStation T-shirt. When his publicist asks if she can get us anything, he orders a hot chocolate. He says he’s a little socially awkward. Sometimes, he confesses, he forgets to leave the house. He has the best cheekbones of any shut-in I’ve ever met.
When Keiynan came to America from Australia, it was to star in the second film of what was conceived of as a four-film Divergent franchise, alongside Shailene Woodley and Miles Teller and Ansel Elgort. Divergent was going to be the next Hunger Games, until it wasn’t. “It was obviously a huge thing for me to be involved in it, and it was my first job in America, so it was pretty cool,” Keiynan says ruefully. But the first three films came out to disappointing reviews and lackluster box office. For a while, the fourth film was going to end up on television, instead of in theaters; now it may never come out at all. “Obviously the last film has been put on hold for quite a while—it’s disappointing,” Keiynan says. “That was definitely humbling: to know that you could be a part of this huge thing and get something, and then it can all sort of go away.”
These days he stars on the CW’s The Flash. Maybe once that would’ve seemed like a step down—to go from movies to TV. There was a stigma to it. “I think certain people felt like they could only do TV and they couldn’t cross over to film,” Keiynan says. “Now, I think, that problem doesn’t exist anymore. But also you don’t need to cross over to film anymore, because TV’s got so much great work there.”
This is mostly a blessing, Keiynan says—that TV has become what film once was. But it’s also a lot more competitive, finding TV work these days. Shailene Woodley was the star of the Divergent franchise—now she’s on HBO, in Big Little Lies. “You see so many actors that we’ve always thought were just film actors going into TV. And sometimes doing more TV than they are doing film, and preferring that. And so when I speak to a lot of my friends, whether they’re my age or older or younger, they’re finding it more difficult, because there are some huge stars pining after these pilots.” You might one day find yourself showing up for an audition, and there in the chair across from you, “it’s, like, Nicole Kidman.”

7. When Hollywood Won’t Cast You, Find Someone Else Who Will
Harry Shum Jr. can still remember what it felt like to be on Glee in that uncanny moment when 26 million people tuned in after the Super Bowl. That surreal sense of being at the center of a phenomenon: “Literally all eyes were on us constantly.” He’s perched on a stool in a coffee shop in Hollywood wearing a Henley, a mildly whimsical hat, and a pervasively radiant sense of health.
The height of Glee mania was 2011. That same year, he shot a few short films for some guys who were making clips for YouTube. Wong Fu Productions—three Asian-American guys just playing around with the format. “We shot like three random shorts,” Harry says, “and those did really well, and then we shot another one that got like 10 million hits, and then it was like, “Oh, there’s something here.” And then they sold a show to YouTube Red.” Single by 30, which became an eight-episode romantic comedy set in L.A., came out last year and the first episode has more than 2 million views on YouTube. You might not have heard of the show. But that’s kind of the point of streamers like YouTube Red: They go deep for relatively narrow but passionate audiences, rather than broad, for everyone.
One thing working on the Wong Fu stuff taught Harry, he says, is that the new generation of viewers Hollywood is trying to reach often doesn’t care about Hollywood at all: “These people, they don’t watch TV or movies. They literally just watch whatever is in front of their computers or on their phones.” Even at the height of Glee, he says, “I would walk down the street, and they’d be like, ‘Oh, my God, you’re in Wong Fu shorts!’ That’s all they know me from. And they go nuts over that. Sometimes walking around with a lot of YouTube personalities that I hang out with, fans are going nuts over them and have no clue who Leonardo DiCaprio is.”
Harry sips his Vietnamese iced coffee. These days he’s got a regular role on a show on Freeform called Shadowhunters. He plays a warlock. Last year he did a Crouching Tiger sequel for Netflix. But what he’s most excited about right now is his role in a studio film just now going into production, Crazy Rich Asians. Warner Bros., one of the oldest studios in Hollywood, is making it with an all-Asian cast, which has more or less no precedent. “It’s one of those that wouldn’t have been able to get made a couple years ago,” Harry says.
All these alternative channels and platforms, he’s noticed, have uncovered audiences that producers and studios used to ignore or were never even aware of. Which in turn has been great for actors who might actually look like those audiences. “There’s so many projects now,” Harry says. “Being a minority—all my friends used to struggle so much for the longest time and only get certain roles, and I’m starting to see them get all these different roles and main-character roles on platforms that you might have not heard of—but they’re, like, working with huge names, right? Producers, huge-name directors. I think that’s incredible.”
8. The Audience for Your Dream Project Is Out There—and Now You Can Find It
Dear White People has just premiered on Netflix and Antoinette Robertson is still feeling the high. She used to work as a model and retains a professional glow. The gold bangle on her arm casts little wedges of light through the Hollywood conference room we’re sitting in. Antoinette has done her time on the kind of television shows that shoot fast and aim broadly: the CW drama series Hart of Dixie; Tyler Perry’s soap opera The Haves and the Have Nots.

But Dear White People, she says, is the first show she’s ever been on where it felt like she, and everyone around her, was making exactly the thing they wanted to make. “We hold no punches,” she says. Netflix’s data is sophisticated enough to pick up on infinite segments of dedicated viewers—who like romantic comedies in which someone dies in a horrible way, say, or Oscar-winning dramas that also have male nudity, or action films that occur in outer space—and in turn, the company has learned to empower creators who can reach those audiences, with minimal interference.
In an earlier era, Antoinette says, before companies like Netflix taught studios to seek out audiences that ran deep and committed, rather than broad and distracted, there’s no way Dear White People would’ve aired in the form that it did. She mimes an executive: “‘Maybe you change it like this, and make it essential to this kind of a character and not necessarily all minorities, because our demographic is this. That doesn’t work for us.’ And somebody might compromise because of that.”
But Netflix, she says, lets them make the show they want to make for the people they want to make it for. That’s rare. Even when she was just starting out, not too long ago, Antoinette says, “you wouldn’t have had that choice.”
9. When Content Is Infinite, Everyone’s an Actor
Jake Paul’s WME agent calls me up and invites me to come see the promised meeting between Jake and a Hollywood producer. The producer turns out to be Douglas Banker—he’s the guy who made Party Boat, with Beau Mirchoff, for Crackle. Today, in the WME offices, Douglas is wearing Nantucket Reds and driving loafers and pitching Jake on a horror movie.
The concept, Douglas says, is basically an updated Scream or Heathers in which a group of young kids are investigating a murder that occurred years ago. That was the treatment he was working off, anyway. “But with your notes and your input,” he says to Jake, “we could contemporize it.” Douglas says he wants to “deficit-finance” the film himself, whatever that means. He wants to bet on Jake. “You just proved this week that your fans will transact,” Douglas says. “I think there could be tremendous upside.”
Jake nods. He hasn’t sat down. He’s standing, listening to Douglas pitch him. The spectacle feels symbolic: all of us circled around this 20-year-old kid. Jake says he likes the idea. His Yeezys squeak as he shifts his weight from foot to foot. He’s thinking out loud about the possibilities.
EDITOR’S PICK
John Boyega on <em>Star Wars</em>, <em>Detroit</em>, and Staying Sane with the Help of Robert Downey Jr.
Entertainment
John Boyega on Star Wars, Detroit, and Staying Sane with the Help of Robert Downey Jr.
“Maybe similarly to Get Out, where, like, the message of the whole thing is like, basically, that racism is terrible,” he says. “Maybe the message throughout this whole movie is, like, helping kids prevent against the stuff that’s been happening at the Manchester bombings.” Jake says maybe they could sell naming rights to a character. He has fans—“kids from Dubai with oil-executive parents”—who have money to burn on stuff like this.
He’ll cast some of his social-media friends, too, he says. Then he notices me in the corner, taking notes. Maybe there’s a GQ reporter, writing a story about this old murder, and that’s how the Jake Paul character finds out about it. He turns to me. “Would you be in the movie?” he asks. “I’m serious.”
I start stammering something.
“You’re definitely in the movie,” he says.
Zach Baron is GQ’s staff writer.
This story originally appeared in the August 2017 issue with the title “The Next Big Star Will Be Very Small.”
Watch Now:
Post Malone, Riz Ahmed, Josephine Skriver, and More Show Us What’s In Their Pockets

Feature

SPONSORED STORIES
 在Booking.com租住您的住宿好處多-前往來找出原因
在Booking.com租住您的住宿好處多-前往來找出原因
BOOKING.COM
 The Butterfly Effect: Georg Jensen Debuts Askill Collection
The Butterfly Effect: Georg Jensen Debuts Askill Collection
HONGKONGTATLER.COM
 Scratching This Part of Your Body is a Sign of Alzheimer's
Scratching This Part of Your Body is a Sign of Alzheimer's
MEMORYREPAIRPROTOCOL.COM
Recommended by
MORE STORIES LIKE THIS ONE
John Cho in <em>Columbus</em> Is John Cho as You&#39;ve Never Seen Him Before
Celebrity
John Cho in Columbus Is John Cho as You've Never Seen Him Before
How Rob Corddry Became Hollywood&#39;s Most Lovable Asshole
Celebrity
How Rob Corddry Became Hollywood's Most Lovable Asshole

GET THE
Magazine

Subscribe now and get a FREE weekender bag and the GQ Style Guide.

Subscribe
FOLLOW US ON
Instagram

Follow @GQ for photos of celebrities, what to wear to work, and more.

Follow Us
GQ ReportContactPress CenterRSS Feeds
Follow Us On Facebook
Follow Us On Twitter
Follow Us On Pinterest
Follow Us On YouTube
Follow Us On Tumblr
Follow Us On Instagram
Find GQ.com Around the World
U.K.ChinaFranceKoreaItalyAustraliaGermanySouth AfricaSpainMexicoRussiaIndiaTaiwanPortugalJapanTurkeyBrazilThailand
Resources
Subscription Services
Careers
Condé Nast Store
Reprints / Permissions
GQ Media Kit
Site Map
Masthead
Accessibility Help
Condé Nast
CNMN Collection
© 2017 Condé Nast. All rights reserved.
Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement (effective 1/4/2014) and Privacy Policy (effective 1/4/2014). GQ may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Texas Monthly – Featured
MENU

THE DAY THE FIRE CAME




A tale of love and loss on the Panhandle plains.

JULY 2017
| by SKIP HOLLANDSWORTH
VIDEOS BY JOHN CARRITHERS
Video Player
On the morning of March 1, Todd Lindley, a forty-year-old science and operations officer with the National Weather Service, walked into his office in Norman, Oklahoma, and sat down in front of his four computer screens. Lindley specializes in weather on the southern Great Plains, a mostly flat five-hundred-mile expanse that runs from Kansas to just below the Panhandle of Texas. That morning, on one of the screens, he noticed a storm system that meteorologists call a “midlatitude cyclone,” a pinwheel of clouds spinning counterclockwise over the open waters of the Pacific, two thousand miles away. Lindley wheeled his chair closer to that screen and typed a few commands on the keyboard. The computer projected that the midlatitude cyclone would reach the northwestern coastline of the United States by March 3, head toward the Rocky Mountains, and swoop down on to the southern Great Plains on March 6, bringing with it wind gusts of at least 50 miles an hour.

Lindley stared at his screen for several seconds. Then he murmured a single word. “Fire.”

For the past couple of months, Lindley had been worried about the possibility of a prairie fire sweeping across the southern Great Plains. After enduring several years of drought, the entire area had received a large amount of rain during the spring and summer of 2016, which in turn had produced an immensity of grass, three to four feet high in some pastures. Now, in these final days of winter, that grass was dormant and dry as hay. All that was needed to set that grass ablaze was a few sparks from an untended campfire, a passing train engine, a malfunctioning power line, or a cigarette butt thrown out a car window. On an especially windy day, that fire could spiral out of control within minutes.

I GUESS YOU KNOW WHAT A STRONG WIND DOES TO A FIRE. IN DRY WEATHER, IT WILL TURN A LITTLE FIRE INTO A ROARING MONSTER...A ROARING, LEAPING, HISSING MONSTER.
Already in January and February, the Panhandle had seen several small fires. In Amarillo, a utility pole had snapped and set off a fire behind a Toot’n Totum that burned an acre of grassland. In nearby Pampa, a grass fire had closed two highways for an afternoon, and another grass fire had advanced toward the town of Tulia, prompting the evacuation of a neighborhood before it was put out.

But Lindley sensed that March 6 was going to be different. Besides the high winds, temperatures were expected to soar to 80 degrees that day, about 20 degrees above normal, and the relative humidity was supposed to drop into the single digits. With such hot, dry, and windy conditions, Lindley suspected the southern Plains might get not just one fire. It could get multiple fires, a phenomenon known as a firestorm. The only question was where those fires would hit.

Lindley quickly sent an email to other National Weather Service meteorologists, state forestry officials, and fire chiefs who work western Kansas, western Oklahoma, and the Texas Panhandle, notifying them of the computer projections. “Current solutions highlight the ejection of a shortwave trough and a highly amplified thermal ridge near the 100th meridian,” he wrote. “Appears to be worthy of an early heads up!”

One of Lindley’s co-workers walked into his office and asked if he really was convinced a fire was coming.

Lindley just nodded his head. It could be a long day, he said. A very, very long day.

crosscrosscross
As Lindley was sending his email, Cody Crockett, a twenty-year-old cowboy, was at work on the nine-thousand-acre Franklin Ranch, seventy or so miles northeast of Amarillo. The Franklin is one of the more famous ranches in the eastern Panhandle. Purchased in 1936 by Oliver Morris Franklin, the inventor of the vaccine for blackleg, a virulent disease that kills cattle, the ranch is now owned by three of his granddaughters (two of whom live in Amarillo, the other in Pampa), who tend to bring their families to visit on weekends and for vacations. The Franklin is a beautiful spread, its main house and guest house nestled in a tree-lined draw, near a pond and a gurgling creek. There’s a swimming pool and a tennis court. Throughout the ranch, wildlife abounds: white-tailed deer, roadrunners, quail, doves, and wild turkey. In the distance, cattle quietly graze on pastures that stretch out like a vast sea.

Cody was as lean as a sapling, six-feet-one and 185 pounds. He lived in a two-bedroom foreman’s house about a half mile from the ranch headquarters. He was almost always up and dressed by sunrise. He’d down a bowl of cereal—he preferred an off-brand version of Lucky Charms—walk outside to feed the ranch’s horses, and then saddle one of the horses, load him into a trailer hooked to a flatbed pickup truck, and head for the pastures.

That morning, Cody drove to the Franklin’s north pastures so he could check on eight hundred steers that had been shipped to the ranch a couple of weeks earlier. Each of the steers weighed around 450 pounds, and Cody’s job was to have them fattened up to at least 750 pounds by October, when they would be shipped to a feed yard and then on to the slaughterhouse. He drove slowly through the pastures, blowing the truck’s horn to get the steers’ attention. Attached to the bed of his pickup was a large metal feeder that dumped pellets of high-protein cow cake on the ground for the steers to eat. At some point that morning he untrailered his horse and went “prowling,” as cowboys like to say. Whenever he saw a steer with its head down or ears drooping—signs of illness—he grabbed his long rope, made a loop, swung it into the air, fired it around the steer’s neck, dismounted, grabbed a medicine kit from his saddle bag, injected the steer with an antibiotic, and within minutes was back on his horse, prowling some more.


Cody Crockett roping calves; Cody in July 2016.
ALICE FRANKLIN; ERIN CRISTA SMITH

Cody checked the windmills and water tanks. He examined the fences to see if any of them needed patching. He then drove over to the west pasture, where he dumped more cake on the ground for forty Angus heifers.

The heifers belonged to Sloan Everett, the 35-year-old husband of Liesl Austin Everett, a daughter of one of the Franklin’s owners. Sloan himself came from a prominent ranching family. His father, Jim Everett, runs the Everett Cattle Company, which owns four ranches, totaling nearly 19,000 acres, just outside the West Texas town of Breckenridge, about a four-hour drive south of the Franklin. Sloan helped his father manage the ranches, and by all accounts, he was a smart cowman. In October 2015, when the pastures in the Breckenridge area were turning bare from drought, he had received the Franklin family’s permission to ship some heifers to the west pasture, which had better grass at the time, and have them bred with bulls. Now the heifers were healthy and calving. Prowling through the herd that morning, Cody was especially attentive. Sloan had recently told Cody that he would soon be driving up to the Franklin to get a look at his livestock, and the last thing Cody wanted Sloan to see was a sluggish heifer or a sick baby calf barely able to stand.

AT THAT MOMENT, IT WAS SIMPLY IMPOSSIBLE TO IMAGINE THAT SOMETHING AWFUL WAS ALREADY HEADED THE FRANKLIN'S WAY.
Cody took a break. As he did every day, he called or texted his girlfriend, Sydney Wallace, who worked in Amarillo as a nurse in the emergency room of Baptist St. Anthony’s Hospital. Sydney was 23, slim and blond—her friends said she looked like Taylor Swift. Whenever she had a couple of days off, she loved visiting the Franklin to be with Cody, always bringing along her little white Maltese dog, Dale. In fact, Sydney was planning to drive to the Franklin later that week, and Cody couldn’t wait to see her. He had told his mother, Kristie, that he and Sydney had been talking about marriage—not soon, but someday. They had even Googled photos of wedding rings on his phone. “There’s no one like her,” Cody liked to say. “No one like my Syd.”

That afternoon, Cody worked more cattle. It was a glorious day on the Franklin, the temperatures mild and the wind a whispery breeze. Clouds drifted across the sky and birds turned circles in the air. As the day came to an end, the sun set slowly over the pastures, its reddish-violet hue spreading across the sky.

At that moment, it was simply impossible to imagine that something awful was already headed the Franklin’s way.

crosscrosscross
Everyone who knew Cody said he was born to be a cowboy. Both of his grandfathers worked as cowboys on ranches in the eastern Panhandle, and his 52-year-old father, Brock, is also a lifelong cowboy who began working on Panhandle ranches when he was a young teenager.

Brock and Kristie had raised Cody and his three siblings—his brothers, Clay and Ben, and his sister, Callie—on a small ranch just outside the dusty town of McLean (population 775), about twenty miles from the Franklin Ranch. All the Crockett children took to the cowboy life, but Cody was consumed with it. At the age of two, he was riding one of his father’s old quarter horses, and at three, he was roping dummies with a piggin’ string. When he was in elementary school, he was tagging along with Brock to spring brandings, where he roped calves and dragged them to the fire. “Even back then, Cody was throwing a good, flat loop, which isn’t easy to do,” says Brock, a stocky man who used to ride broncos in amateur rodeos. “Other cowboys would tell me that he was on his way to making a good hand. Out here, for a little boy, that’s as good a compliment as you can get.”

On Saturdays, Cody would lie on the floor in the living room, drink Dr Peppers with one of his buddies, and talk about the big ranches, like the Four Sixes, that he planned to work on one day. When older cowboys came over to the house to talk, he’d sit right beside them, his elbows on his knees. “You could almost see him making mental notes as they talked about what ropes they used or which trucks they liked,” says Kristie, who teaches second grade at the McLean public school. “My daddy [Bobby Thompson, who for many years was one of the cowboys on the Four Sixes,] once told him, ‘Cody, there’s a difference between working cattle and disturbing cattle.’ Cody used to repeat that line every chance he got.”

AT HIS GRADUATION CEREMONY, IN MAY 2015, CODY LEFT HIS DIPLOMA WEDGED BETWEEN TWO CHAIRS AND WAS AT THE RANCH EARLY THE NEXT MORNING.
During his high school years, his classmates named him Most Handsome and Best Dressed, even though he wore the same thing to school every day: a Western snap-button shirt, a Western belt, ironed blue jeans, boots from Amarillo’s Bustamante Cowboy Boots, and, of course, his cowboy hat. He was the star running back on the McLean Tigers’ six-man football team, good enough to play in junior college, people said. But cowboying was already his life. Sitting in a classroom, he’d get on his phone and buy hay for a local man who paid him to look after a small herd of cattle. In the late afternoons, no matter how long football practice lasted, he would break horses in a small arena next to his house. When his senior year came around, his parents asked him if he wanted a senior class ring. No, Cody said, he’d prefer a new pair of spurs. “He wore those spurs everywhere,” Kristie says. “It was a nice sound, listening to those rowels click against the floor.”

It was also during Cody’s senior year that a man named Joe Magee paid him a visit. The 69-year-old Magee is a longtime Panhandle cowman, his face as wrinkled as an old saddle. He makes leasing arrangements with the owners of ranches, including the Franklin, to run his cattle on their pastures. Magee had known the Crockett family for many years, and whenever he saw Cody at work, he’d let out a whistle. “Roping, herding, sorting, breaking colts—there wasn’t anything he couldn’t do,” Magee says. “And he was a ‘yes, sir–no, sir’ kind of young man, respectful to everyone, as honest as the day is long. I knew that I needed to hire him, because if I didn’t, someone else would.”

Magee told Cody he wanted him to be his full-time cowboy on the Franklin as soon as Cody graduated from high school. Cody was ecstatic. At his graduation ceremony, in May 2015, he left his diploma wedged between two chairs and was at the ranch early the next morning, working cattle. Magee paid him around $2,500 a month and also gave him a “beef”—a side of butchered, frozen beef for him to eat. (There’s a long tradition in the Panhandle that cowboys who work full-time on a ranch receive a beef each year from their employers.)

Considering that Cody worked seven days a week, he wasn’t exactly getting rich. He also had to pay for his own health insurance to cover any on-the-job injuries, like “horse wrecks” (when a horse falls on a cowboy). But he wasn’t complaining. “He was one of the hardest-working cowboys we had,” says Magee’s son Destry, who helps oversee his father’s business. “If we had told him to dig a hole to China, he’d have said ‘Yes, sir’ and gone running after a shovel, and he’d have had a smile on his face the whole time.”

In September 2015, when Cody was suffering from intense headaches and a high fever, his mother drove him to the emergency room at Baptist St. Anthony’s. Sydney Wallace walked up to his bed and said, “Hi, I’m your nurse.” Cody immediately flexed his biceps, hoping to impress her. Another nurse later slipped him Sydney’s number. When he called, Sydney said she’d let him take her hiking in the Palo Duro Canyon, but she wouldn’t go to dinner or to a movie until she got to know him better. “I laughed,” Kristie says. “I realized right then that Cody had met his match.”

Cody Crockett and Sydney Wallace
Cody Crockett and Sydney Wallace, in July 2016.
Erin Crista Smith
Sydney had grown up around Austin, spent her high school years in Monahans, a small town near Odessa, and then enrolled at West Texas A&M University in Canyon to study nursing. “She loved the pace and excitement of the emergency room,” says her mother, Lisa Sanchez. “She used to tell me that she wanted to move to Dallas to work in the trauma center at Parkland Hospital. And I’m sure she would have done it. But then she met Cody.”

On that first date, after their hike through the canyon, Sydney did let Cody take her to dinner, at Bracero’s, her favorite Mexican restaurant in Amarillo. The next day, he brought her to McLean to watch his little brother Ben play in a junior high football game. Within a week, they were an item. On nights she worked, he’d show up at the hospital with Taco Bell. On one of his trips to Amarillo, he stopped at a boutique called the English Rose and bought her some Kendra Scott jewelry. Sydney, in turn, bought him Cinch Western shirts and a pair of tennis shoes, which he’d never buy for himself, so he’d have something to put on at the end of the day when his feet hurt from wearing boots.

As she realized she was falling in love, Sydney traded in her small Kia Rio and bought a Chevy Traverse SUV, so she could better navigate the rutted dirt roads that led to the Franklin. At the ranch, Cody took her on horseback rides. They went swimming in the pool at the ranch headquarters. Sydney and her dog, Dale, often rode with Cody in the pickup to feed cattle. (She liked to jump out of the truck to open and shut the gates that led from one pasture to another.) One day, she went with him to a spring branding, where she castrated several bulls.

At night, they often drove into McLean to have supper with Cody’s family. (Some rural Texans still call lunch “dinner” and the evening meal “supper.”) Or they went to the Red River Steakhouse, where she would order a steak kebab and he would order a jalapeño bacon cheeseburger. One night they visited the dance hall in McLean—which the locals jokingly refer to as the McLean Country Club—and they two-stepped around the floor.

“What we loved about Sydney was that she just took to our way of life,” says Thacker Haynes, the pastor of the McLean United Methodist Church, who also owns a small ranch outside of town. “And, boy, did she have spunk.” One Sunday morning, Cody and Sydney came to church. As they were walking in, he introduced her to the pastor. “I said, ‘Cody, thank you for bringing your girlfriend.’ And Sydney replied, ‘He didn’t bring me. I brought him.’ ”

crosscrosscross
At some point, Cody also introduced Sydney to members of the Franklin family. One day, she got to meet Sloan Everett, the young Breckenridge rancher, and his wife, Liesl. Sloan and Liesl looked like the portrait of Texas ranch royalty. He was boyishly handsome, with sandy-colored hair, blue eyes, and an easy smile. Liesl was also blue-eyed and as elegant as a swan, her blond hair usually pulled back in a ponytail. They had two very young, blue-eyed children—a daughter named Scarlett Austin and a son named Samuel Sloan, who babbled cheerfully and loved being held.

Sloan was raised in Breckenridge. He attended Baylor University, graduating in 2004 with a double major in finance and entrepreneurship. He spent a couple of years in Oklahoma working as an auditor for ConocoPhillips and then moved to Dallas to be a financial analyst for Hunt Oil. In 2009, he met Liesl, who was five years younger. She too was a Baylor graduate, a fashion merchandising major who had moved to Dallas to work for the online division of Neiman Marcus.

Both Sloan and Liesl were devout Christians who unabashedly talked about God’s presence in their lives. At the start of their first date, in 2009, he spent a few minutes on the phone with two inner-city kids he mentored, arranging a time to pick them up for church. “When I got home that night, I called my parents and told them I had never met a guy with such character,” Liesl says. “He was different, genuinely kind and sincere. It was hard for me not to think about him.”

Sloan and Leisl EverettSloan with his daughter.
Sloan and Leisl Everett at their wedding, in July 2011; Sloan and his daughter Scarlett.
GRAY’S STUDIO; CAROLINE JURGENSEN

As they continued to date, Sloan told her that despite his promising future in the oil business, what he really wanted to do was return to Breckenridge to work on his family’s ranches. He took Liesl to his small North Dallas apartment one night, brought out his guitar, and played her “My Rifle, My Pony and Me” from the 1959 John Wayne western Rio Bravo. He read to her from one of his favorite books, Ben Green’s memoir Horse Tradin’. One afternoon, Liesl pinned a photo of Sloan on the wall of her cubicle at Neiman’s. He was in his ranch garb, his hat pulled down over his eyes. “I looked at that photo over and over, and I thought, ‘I want to marry that man,’ ” she says.

In July 2011, they did marry, at an outdoor ceremony on the Franklin, attended by more than two hundred friends and relatives. Liesl walked down the aisle to the theme song from the miniseries Lonesome Dove. After a Caribbean honeymoon, they moved into a three-bedroom home on one of the Everett ranches. Early in the mornings, Sloan would work cattle with the Everett cowboys, and in the late afternoons, he’d lift weights at the local gym or run on the high school track. At night, he’d drive to his parents’ house to talk with his father about ways to improve the ranches’ productivity and increase the size of the herds. And then he’d go home and work on his computer, putting the ranches’ business operations on QuickBooks or studying online reports about bulls that were for sale.

ONE AFTERNOON, LIESL PINNED A PHOTO OF SLOAN ON THE WALL OF HER CUBICLE AT NEIMAN’S. HE WAS IN HIS RANCH GARB, HIS HAT PULLED DOWN OVER HIS EYES. “I LOOKED AT THAT PHOTO AND I THOUGHT, ‘I WANT TO MARRY THAT MAN,’ ” SHE SAYS.
“Sloan was learning the cattle business from top to bottom,” says the elder Everett, who is 66. (Jim himself had left Breckenridge after high school to attend college and law school, and he had worked briefly as a prosecutor for the Dallas County district attorney’s office before returning to Breckenridge to take over the family’s cattle company.) “He was so smart and so thorough. There was no doubt in my mind that when the time came for me to retire, the ranches were going to be in very good hands.”

In fact, Sloan was so conscientious about his job that he regularly drove to the Franklin just to check on that small herd of heifers that he had put on the west pasture. Liesl and the children usually came with him so they could spend time on the ranch and also see her parents in Amarillo.

This past February, after Cody let him know that the heifers were starting to calve, Sloan talked to Liesl, who was three months pregnant with their third child, and they decided to travel with the kids to Amarillo on March 3. From there, Sloan planned to go with Liesl’s father and her brothers on a quick two-day ski trip to Taos. He told Liesl that when he got back, he wanted to swing by the Franklin.

Maybe we can get there Sunday afternoon, March 5, Sloan said. Or Monday, March 6.

Sounds good to me, Liesl said.

THE PANHANDLE FAMILY TRADITION

Video Player
00:0000:00
Urban Texans tend to think cowboying is a vanishing way of life. But in the Panhandle, cowboys still raise their children to become cowboys themselves. Here, Sy Brown, who works the Combs-Worley Ranch near the Franklin, takes his two young sons out to the pastures to learn the trade.


After sending his March 1 email about the midlatitude cyclone, Todd Lindley, the National Weather Service meteorologist, could think about little else. He kept his eyes glued on his computer screens as the storm system, which was still 15,000 to 20,000 feet in the atmosphere, raced over the Pacific Coast. He talked extensively to Greg Murdoch, a National Weather Service senior forecaster who is based in Midland. They studied the movement of the cyclone’s “low-level thermal ridge,” and they double-checked the temperatures and relative humidity that were forecast for March 6. The day was definitely going to be hot and dry. Lindley sighed. The entire southern Great Plains was turning into a tinderbox.

On March 4, the National Weather Service began issuing warnings to western Kansas, western Oklahoma, and the Texas Panhandle about the potential for wildfires. In Texas, officials with the Texas A&M Forest Service made sure their firefighting aircraft—single-engine air tankers that can drop six to eight hundred gallons of thick red fire retardant per flight—were completely fueled and ready to fly. The forest service officials also ordered nearly thirty of their best firefighters, some from as far away as East Texas, to travel to the Panhandle. Meanwhile, in the rural towns, members of the volunteer fire departments double-checked their “grass rigs,” customized one-ton trucks that carry four hundred gallons of water and can move quickly through off-road terrain.

Early on the morning of March 6, as the midlatitude cyclone reached the Rocky Mountains, the winds began tumbling toward the ground, and they were indeed gusting up to 50 miles an hour—equivalent to the wind speed of a decent-sized tropical storm. Around 11:30 a.m., the winds reached the southern Great Plains. In Beaver County, Oklahoma, a power line started swinging in the wind. A shower of sparks fell to the ground and a spot fire sprang up, the size of a fist. Usually such a small fire stays “benign,” to use the parlance of wildfire specialists, and quickly dies out. But pushed by the wind, this fire kept growing, the flames wrapping around the wilted grass, and it was soon on the run, galloping eastward across an open range.

March 6 fire on the plains.
Panhandle fire, March 6, 2017.
Hoover Volunteer Fire Department
Within an hour, there were reports of half a dozen more grass fires in Oklahoma and Kansas. Around 1:45 p.m., a couple of spot fires were seen three miles north of Amarillo, along U.S. 287. They were a mile and a half apart and most likely had been caused by sparks from a chain being dragged along the pavement by a truck or trailer. The two fires quickly merged and turned into one large fire. Brad Smith, a Texas A&M Forest Service wildfire analyst, drove to the scene. By the time he got there, the fire was at least three miles wide and the flames at the front were twenty feet high. It was moving at 6 to 7 miles per hour, as fast as Smith had ever seen a wildfire move on the Texas Plains.

Around 2:30 p.m., there was a report of another Texas fire, this one near the town of Perryton, in the northeast corner of the Panhandle. John Erickson—a 73-year-old rancher who also writes the best-selling Hank the Cowdog children’s book series about a smelly but lovable cowdog that lives on a Panhandle ranch—drove his pickup to the top of a bluff to get a look at it. Over the years, Erickson had seen his share of prairie fires. In The Case of the Blazing Sky, his fifty-first Hank book (Erickson has published 69 of them since 1983), he has Hank tell his young readers, “I guess you know what strong wind does to a fire. In dry weather, it will turn a little fire into a roaring monster . . . a roaring, leaping, hissing monster.” That afternoon, standing on the bluff, Erickson realized a monster was on its way. He watched the fire triple in size. The smoke, he would later say, looked like a cloud from an atom bomb explosion. He drove back to his ranch house and told his wife, Kris, to pack some clothes in a suitcase. They needed to get out of there as soon as they could.

Along with the Texas A&M Forest Service firefighters, at least a dozen Panhandle volunteer fire departments arrived to do battle with the fires near Amarillo and Perryton. The men and women stood on their grass rigs and shot streams of water at the sides of the fires to keep them from getting wider. Using road graders and bulldozers, they built firebreaks to slow the blazes’ forward momentum or divert the fires away from populated areas.


SOURCES: Texas A&M Forest Service, National Weather Service
MAP BY DARLA CAMERON

But the two fires were relentless. They jumped over many of the firebreaks and hurtled across pasture after pasture—scorching hundreds of thousands of acres. The fires burned down barns, outbuildings, and ranch houses. (Erickson lost his house and his adjoining office, but he did escape with his Mac, which contained his most recent unpublished Hank stories.) They swept over bawling cattle and panicked horses. Pronghorn, racing away from the fires, ran straight into barbed-wire fences, decapitating themselves. In the town of Canadian, a young man named Cade Koch left his job at a hardware store and headed for his home in Lipscomb, 25 miles away, so that he could check on his wife, who they had just learned was pregnant. He tried to drive through a thick cloud of smoke that was coming from the Perryton fire, but the truck stalled. Cade, who was only 25 years old, suffocated from smoke inhalation.

And then, about 3:45 that afternoon, a report came in of a third fire in Texas, this one in the southeastern part of the Panhandle, near the town of Lefors. It was headed due east, straight toward the Franklin Ranch, six miles away.


As promised, Sydney had driven out to see Cody. And as always, she had brought along Dale, her dog. While riding through the north pastures with Cody, she had Snapchatted a photo of Dale sticking his head out the window of Cody’s pickup, looking at some yearlings.

By 4 p.m., they were back at Cody’s house. They saw a plume of smoke in the distance. It looked as if a small plane might have crashed several miles away. At 4:06, Cody got a call from his father, Brock, who was at his ranch, standing outside by his barn. He too was looking at the smoke. Cody told his father that he was going to drive to the western side of the Franklin to see if a fire was threatening any of the ranch’s cattle.

USUALLY SUCH A SMALL FIRE STAYS “BENIGN,” TO USE THE PARLANCE OF WILDFIRE SPECIALISTS. BUT PUSHED BY THE WIND, THIS FIRE KEPT GROWING, THE FLAMES WRAPPING AROUND THE WILTED GRASS, AND IT WAS SOON ON THE RUN.
Cody saddled and trailered one of his favorite horses, Junior, a bay-colored gelding with a black mane and black tail. Meanwhile, Sydney hopped into the passenger seat of the pickup. If he tried to persuade her to stay behind, she was having none of it. (“She wasn’t one who was told, ‘You stay here,’ ” one of her friends would later say.) But she did one thing that was out of the ordinary: she left Dale behind in the house.

Cody drove west for a couple of miles on one of the ranch’s dirt roads. When he and Sydney reached the west pasture, he came to a sudden stop and no doubt stared through the windshield in bewilderment—because there, standing in the pasture, was Sloan Everett.

Earlier that afternoon, Sloan, Liesl, their children, and Liesl’s mother, Jane, had driven to the Franklin from Amarillo. They had arrived around 3 p.m., and by 4, they too were looking at the smoke on the horizon. Sloan had told Liesl that he was going to take a quick trip out to the west pasture to make sure his heifers and calves were not in the line of the fire.

He had driven one of the ranch’s four-wheelers to the pasture. With his cellphone, he had taken a few photos of the smoke, which was still far away and looked to be only a couple of football fields in width. But by the time Cody and Sydney pulled into the west pasture, at around 4:30, conditions were quickly changing. The smoke was getting closer, and below the smoke was a visible line of fire. Sloan called Liesl and told her that she, her mother, and the kids needed to leave the ranch immediately.

Fire photo by Sloan Everett
A photo of the March 6 fire on the Franklin Ranch taken by Sloan just minutes before he attempted to save his cattle.
Sloan, however, wasn’t going anywhere. Neither was Cody. The young rancher and the young cowboy had devoted their lives to taking care of cattle, and they were not about to let those forty heifers and the newly born calves burn to death. “I’m not sure if city people will ever understand this,” says Magee, Cody’s boss. “But out here, you get up every morning and you think about what you need to do that’s best for your cows. That’s your responsibility. You look after cattle. You don’t think twice about it.”

Sloan and Cody decided that the best way to save the heifers and calves was to move them to the south, so they’d be below the fire as it swept eastward. Cody unloaded Junior. He most likely told Sydney to drive the truck to a gate on the southern side of the west pasture and blow the truck’s horn. Most of the cattle, thinking they were about to be fed, would have followed the truck. Cody, who was on Junior, and Sloan, who was on the four-wheeler, trailed behind the herd, pushing along the heavily pregnant heifers that were moving more slowly.

They must have constantly been looking over their shoulders, staring at the smoke, trying to track the fire’s progress. Sloan made another quick call to Liesl to make sure that they had left the ranch. (They had.) But the call went straight to Liesl’s voicemail. (Cell service on Panhandle ranches is notoriously spotty.) When Liesl later played back the message, she could hear Sloan calling to his heifers, making a yip yip yip sound. At the end of the message, she heard him say “Liesl?” And then the line went dead.

The gate at the southern end of the west pasture led to the neighboring Gething Ranch. Sydney probably jumped out of the truck to open the gate, and the heifers trudged into an empty pasture, their big bodies swaying and their heads swinging. The calves, some of them only a week old, trotted next to their mothers. Sloan, Cody, and Sydney had to have felt a sense of relief—perhaps even jubilation. They could see the smoke was headed due east. They—and the cattle—were out of the line of fire.


But at around 5:30, the wind inexplicably shifted, ever so slightly. Instead of blowing straight out of the west, it started coming from the northwest. Panhandle residents standing in their front yards would barely have noticed the change. But on the Gething Ranch, Sloan, Cody, and Sydney must have immediately sensed what was happening. The fire, now veering in a southeasterly direction, was moving straight toward them.

Cody knew the Gething well. As a teenager, he’d done “day work” (what cowboys call part-time work) on the ranch. He knew its pastures were dotted with sand hills, which look somewhat like sand dunes next to a seashore, except that the hills are covered with grass and scrub brush. And the sand hills offered a chance of survival. If they could get on top of a hill, it was possible that the fire would stay in a draw, go around the hill, and miss them altogether.

There is no way of knowing exactly what happened next. But here is one likely scenario. Cody and Sydney climbed onto Junior and headed up the closest hill, leaving the truck and trailer behind. Sloan was right behind them on his four-wheeler. Sydney wrapped her arms around Cody’s waist, hanging on for dear life. When Cody turned in his saddle, he could see the fire. It was writhing up the hill, spitting red sparks, with columns of throat-clogging smoke swirling in front of the flames. The burning twigs on the bushes crackled like gunfire.

At some point, Sloan lost control of the four-wheeler and was thrown to the ground. (The four-wheeler was later found tangled in a barbed-wire fence.) Cody and Sydney also ended up on the ground. Either a terrified Junior bucked them off his back, or the horse stumbled in the sand, fell to his knees, and rolled. Sloan, Cody, and Sydney did the only thing they could do: they ran. Soon, smoke enveloped them like a gray-black curtain, shutting out the world. They couldn’t see or breathe. Disoriented, they ran in different directions, gasping for air, pumping their legs through the sand as fast as they could.

They didn’t get far. Within seconds, the flames were on top of them.


The fire kept pushing eastward until the volunteer fire departments and the forest service eventually got it under control. On a bluff above the Franklin, several cowboys gathered. Joe Magee, his son Destry, and Cody’s father, Brock, were also there. Because Cody hadn’t returned their texts or calls for the past couple of hours, they knew something was wrong. They hooked their thumbs over their belts and squinted toward the distant burned-out pastures. They didn’t say much.

One of Magee’s cowboys, 37-year-old Sy Brown, pulled up in his truck. When he’s not working on a Magee ranch, Brown serves as the volunteer fire chief for the town of Lefors, not far from where the fire had started. Brown told the other men that he had just driven past the ranch headquarters, which the fire had skirted (partly because the lawns around the homes and the outbuildings were well watered, freshly mowed, and contained no dry grass). He also had driven through the west pasture and through some of the northern pastures, but he hadn’t spotted Cody, Sydney, or Sloan. “I don’t know,” Brown said quietly. “Maybe they went south, to the Gething.”

Evening was coming on. The sun was dropping behind the horizon. Joe, Destry, and Brock piled into a truck and drove the fence line between the Franklin and the Gething. Huddled against a corner fence was Junior. His hair was burned down to the skin and his saddle blanket was smoldering. He was in such pain he couldn’t look up. Brock got out of the truck and jerked the saddle and saddle blanket off the horse. Joe leaned against the pickup and looked at Brock. “We’ve got a wreck on our hands,” he said.

A few of the cowboys spread out in a single line, thirty or forty yards apart, and they started walking through the Gething pasture, using the flashlights on their cellphones to guide their way. The ground was still warm from the fire, the heat seeping up through their boots, but they kept walking. Every few yards or so, they’d do an old-fashioned “brush call”: shouting “woo-woo” to one another so that they knew they were maintaining a straight line. (When working brushy pastures, looking for stray cattle, cowboys on horseback have long used the same call.) As they ascended one of the sand hills, they heard a feeble cry.

“Hey.”

It was Cody.

Brock and the others ran up the sand hill. Sydney was on the ground, curled up like a kitten, lifeless. Forty yards away, on his back, was Cody. His clothes had been burned off. The only things remaining on his body were his leather Western belt, his Bustamante boots, and the spurs he’d gotten his senior year of high school.

“Dad, I’m sorry,” Cody said. “I’m sorry.”

“Son, you did nothing wrong,” Brock replied, cradling Cody’s head in his arms.

Cody’s skin was almost black from his burns, his hair gone. He told his father he was cold. Brock stripped off his shirt and wrapped it around his son.

“I’ve come a long way, Dad,” said Cody, who seemed to be getting delirious. “I know, honey,” Brock said. He then called Kristie and said, “You need to get on out here. It’s bad.”

Fifty yards away, one of the other cowboys, 32-year-old Derek Kincannon, found Sloan. He too was naked except for his boots and belt. “Sir, please help me,” Sloan whispered. Kincannon had no idea what to do. He finally held Sloan’s hand and said, “You just keep breathing. Help is on its way.”

By then, Liesl had returned with her mother and the children to their ranch house. Someone called and let them know that Sloan and Cody had been found alive and that medical helicopters were on their way to the Gething to transport the men to a hospital in Amarillo.

More cowboys and volunteer firefighters got to the sand hill in their pickups and grass rigs. They formed a circle with the trucks and turned on their brights so the helicopters would know where to land. When the first helicopter touched down, a paramedic ran over to Sloan. He took one look at him and began reciting the 23rd Psalm. Sloan moved his lips. The paramedic thought he was trying to recite the psalm along with him.

By the time the second helicopter arrived, Kristie and Cody’s two brothers, Clay and Ben, were at his side. Paramedics lifted Cody onto a backboard. “Thank y’all for coming,” Cody said to the paramedics just before they sedated him.

Sloan died before he got to the hospital. Cody died minutes after he was wheeled into the emergency room. Back at the Gething, a justice of the peace arrived to examine Sydney’s body and officially pronounce her cause of death. She was wrapped in a sheet, placed in the backseat of a pickup, and driven to a funeral home in the nearby town of Pampa. Meanwhile, one of Magee’s cowboys went looking for Junior. He shot the horse in the head, putting him out of his misery.

Everyone prepared to go home. In the darkness, some heifers and calves began ambling from the Gething to the open gate that led to the west pasture. It was Sloan’s herd. Incredibly, except for three calves, all of them had escaped the fire—apparently, they had kept moving south away from the flames—and now they were returning to the pasture that they knew best. Against all odds, Cody, Sydney, and Sloan had saved the cattle.

Video Player
00:0000:00

The next morning was chilly but beautiful. The wind was gone, and the skies clear except for a few lingering wisps of smoke. As friends gathered at the Crockett home, Brock went off to feed cattle and patch some fence at his ranch. “That’s what you do out here,” he says. “You get up and do your job.” When he got home that afternoon, he opened a hospital bag and pulled out Cody’s belt, boots, and spurs. He set them on the floor next to his own bed.

All that Liesl got back was Sloan’s cellphone, which, incredibly, was still working (he had carried it in a waterproof and fireproof phone case), and his wedding ring, which had soot on it. Sydney’s mother, Lisa, received Sydney’s Apple Watch and a pair of earrings. Two days after the fire, Lisa drove up to the Panhandle with her husband. Along with Sydney’s father, Stephen Wallace, and his wife, they went to the Gething pasture with Brock and Kristie. At the spot where Sydney had been found, Lisa and Stephen scooped some sand into bottles. “Sometimes I ask myself, ‘How could this have happened?’ ” Lisa says. “Three wonderful young people, taken away by a wild fire. How could such a thing have happened?”

I'M NOT SURE IF CITY PEOPLE WILL EVER UNDERSTAND THIS. BUT OUT HERE, YOU GET UP EVERY MORNING AND THINK ABOUT WHAT YOU NEED TO DO FOR YOUR COWS. THAT'S YOUR RESPONSIBILITY. YOU LOOK AFTER CATTLE. YOU DON'T THINK TWICE ABOUT IT.
Lisa brought Dale back to her home. At a Methodist church in Round Rock, north of Austin, where Sydney had been baptized as a baby, close to 400 mourners attended her funeral. Propped on top of the casket was a photo of Sydney and Cody. During Sloan’s funeral at Breckenridge’s First Baptist Church, which was attended by more than 750 mourners, a video was played of Sloan singing “My Rifle, My Pony and Me.” In their eulogies, his friends described him as the finest man they had ever met. His father, Jim, spoke last. “I know the Lord was there with him in that fire,” he said, “and I know that He protected him from the pain, and that He was waiting there to take him with Him into indescribable joy.” For several seconds, there was silence as Jim tried not to sob.

At the One Way Church in McLean (the biggest church in town), more than a thousand people showed up for Cody’s funeral, the crowd so large that it spilled onto the street. The fourteen pallbearers—his two brothers and twelve of his cowboy friends, young men with names such as Cutter and Kaleton—wore their best cowboy boots, starched jeans, starched white button-down shirts adorned with a single carnation, and their cowboy hats. In his message, Pastor Haynes told the crowd, “Cody was doing what he loved to do. . . . A better cowboy you cannot find.” At the end of the service, the saddle that had been on Junior the night of the fire was placed on top of Cody’s casket. There was a procession to the city cemetery, and Cody and his saddle were buried next to the graves of his great-grandparents.

The tragedy reverberated through America’s rural communities. On Facebook pages and websites devoted to farming and ranching, there were countless postings about Sloan’s, Cody’s, and Sydney’s deaths. (“Only the good die young,” someone wrote. “Maybe God needed them to help with ‘the cattle on a thousand hills,’ ” wrote someone else, quoting from the Book of Psalms.) Amy Dean, a grandmother from Colorado, wrote and recorded “Cowboys With Wings,” a song memorializing Sloan, Cody, and Sydney. It was the first song she’d ever released. An Amarillo Christian rock musician, Matt Dietz, recorded a tribute song that he titled “Amarillo Burned.”

People who had never met Sloan, Cody, or Sydney mailed cards and letters to their families. Cowboys from as far away as Waco showed up at the Crockett ranch and asked Brock if he needed any help. Throughout the southern Great Plains, families who were affected by the fires were overwhelmed with donations, receiving everything from bales of hay to covered-dish suppers. Teenagers who belonged to 4-H clubs and Future Farmers of America chapters helped with the cleanup. “Some girls from Oklahoma State who were on spring break showed up and asked if they could clean ranch houses,” Magee says. He pauses and shakes his head. “There’s a lot of love among ranching people. But Lord, it can be a tough business. Lord, it can be tough.”


Crosses mark where Cody, Sydney, and Sloan were found on the Gething Ranch.
Alice Franklin

On that single March afternoon, at least 32 fires broke out in the southern Great Plains, scorching more than 1.2 million acres, “the largest individual Plains fire outbreak documented in the modern era,” says Lindley, the National Weather Service meteorologist. The amount of damage totaled tens of millions of dollars. Scattered throughout the pastures were at least a couple of thousand dead cows. Other cows and calves were burned so badly—“staggering around like broken toys,” wrote one reporter—that they were shot and carried by bulldozers to large pits for burial. Besides the deaths in Texas, a 63-year-old Oklahoma woman suffered a fatal heart attack as she and her husband tried to put out a fire that threatened their farm. In Kansas, a trucker suffocated when his semi jackknifed on a highway that was blanketed with smoke.

Ironically, in mid-March, bountiful showers passed over the Panhandle, and by the first of May, carpets of new grass were already sprouting up in the blackened pastures. At the Franklin Ranch, Liesl’s family hosted a steak dinner to honor the cowboys, the volunteer firefighters, and the paramedics who had been at their ranch and at the Gething during the blaze. Everyone tried to make small talk around the tables. A couple of the cowboys began to say how much they were going to miss Sloan, Cody, and Sydney, but they got choked up.

Before the dinner ended, at about 9 p.m.—the cowboys had to get home to bed to be ready for work the next morning—someone asked Liesl about her new baby, due in August. Liesl said she was having a boy.

What are you going to name him? someone else asked.

Well, Liesl said, since Samuel Sloan is already named after his daddy, she wanted to name the baby after a young man she knew who was never going to have kids. A young man whom she deeply admired, she said, who during his life had been earnest and kind and courageous. A young man who deserved some sort of legacy.

There was a silence. “I’m going to call my baby Cody,” she said.

Copyright © Texas Monthly 2017. All rights reserved.
Texas Monthly – Featured
MENU

THE DAY THE FIRE CAME




A tale of love and loss on the Panhandle plains.

JULY 2017
| by SKIP HOLLANDSWORTH
VIDEOS BY JOHN CARRITHERS
Video Player
On the morning of March 1, Todd Lindley, a forty-year-old science and operations officer with the National Weather Service, walked into his office in Norman, Oklahoma, and sat down in front of his four computer screens. Lindley specializes in weather on the southern Great Plains, a mostly flat five-hundred-mile expanse that runs from Kansas to just below the Panhandle of Texas. That morning, on one of the screens, he noticed a storm system that meteorologists call a “midlatitude cyclone,” a pinwheel of clouds spinning counterclockwise over the open waters of the Pacific, two thousand miles away. Lindley wheeled his chair closer to that screen and typed a few commands on the keyboard. The computer projected that the midlatitude cyclone would reach the northwestern coastline of the United States by March 3, head toward the Rocky Mountains, and swoop down on to the southern Great Plains on March 6, bringing with it wind gusts of at least 50 miles an hour.

Lindley stared at his screen for several seconds. Then he murmured a single word. “Fire.”

For the past couple of months, Lindley had been worried about the possibility of a prairie fire sweeping across the southern Great Plains. After enduring several years of drought, the entire area had received a large amount of rain during the spring and summer of 2016, which in turn had produced an immensity of grass, three to four feet high in some pastures. Now, in these final days of winter, that grass was dormant and dry as hay. All that was needed to set that grass ablaze was a few sparks from an untended campfire, a passing train engine, a malfunctioning power line, or a cigarette butt thrown out a car window. On an especially windy day, that fire could spiral out of control within minutes.

I GUESS YOU KNOW WHAT A STRONG WIND DOES TO A FIRE. IN DRY WEATHER, IT WILL TURN A LITTLE FIRE INTO A ROARING MONSTER...A ROARING, LEAPING, HISSING MONSTER.
Already in January and February, the Panhandle had seen several small fires. In Amarillo, a utility pole had snapped and set off a fire behind a Toot’n Totum that burned an acre of grassland. In nearby Pampa, a grass fire had closed two highways for an afternoon, and another grass fire had advanced toward the town of Tulia, prompting the evacuation of a neighborhood before it was put out.

But Lindley sensed that March 6 was going to be different. Besides the high winds, temperatures were expected to soar to 80 degrees that day, about 20 degrees above normal, and the relative humidity was supposed to drop into the single digits. With such hot, dry, and windy conditions, Lindley suspected the southern Plains might get not just one fire. It could get multiple fires, a phenomenon known as a firestorm. The only question was where those fires would hit.

Lindley quickly sent an email to other National Weather Service meteorologists, state forestry officials, and fire chiefs who work western Kansas, western Oklahoma, and the Texas Panhandle, notifying them of the computer projections. “Current solutions highlight the ejection of a shortwave trough and a highly amplified thermal ridge near the 100th meridian,” he wrote. “Appears to be worthy of an early heads up!”

One of Lindley’s co-workers walked into his office and asked if he really was convinced a fire was coming.

Lindley just nodded his head. It could be a long day, he said. A very, very long day.

crosscrosscross
As Lindley was sending his email, Cody Crockett, a twenty-year-old cowboy, was at work on the nine-thousand-acre Franklin Ranch, seventy or so miles northeast of Amarillo. The Franklin is one of the more famous ranches in the eastern Panhandle. Purchased in 1936 by Oliver Morris Franklin, the inventor of the vaccine for blackleg, a virulent disease that kills cattle, the ranch is now owned by three of his granddaughters (two of whom live in Amarillo, the other in Pampa), who tend to bring their families to visit on weekends and for vacations. The Franklin is a beautiful spread, its main house and guest house nestled in a tree-lined draw, near a pond and a gurgling creek. There’s a swimming pool and a tennis court. Throughout the ranch, wildlife abounds: white-tailed deer, roadrunners, quail, doves, and wild turkey. In the distance, cattle quietly graze on pastures that stretch out like a vast sea.

Cody was as lean as a sapling, six-feet-one and 185 pounds. He lived in a two-bedroom foreman’s house about a half mile from the ranch headquarters. He was almost always up and dressed by sunrise. He’d down a bowl of cereal—he preferred an off-brand version of Lucky Charms—walk outside to feed the ranch’s horses, and then saddle one of the horses, load him into a trailer hooked to a flatbed pickup truck, and head for the pastures.

That morning, Cody drove to the Franklin’s north pastures so he could check on eight hundred steers that had been shipped to the ranch a couple of weeks earlier. Each of the steers weighed around 450 pounds, and Cody’s job was to have them fattened up to at least 750 pounds by October, when they would be shipped to a feed yard and then on to the slaughterhouse. He drove slowly through the pastures, blowing the truck’s horn to get the steers’ attention. Attached to the bed of his pickup was a large metal feeder that dumped pellets of high-protein cow cake on the ground for the steers to eat. At some point that morning he untrailered his horse and went “prowling,” as cowboys like to say. Whenever he saw a steer with its head down or ears drooping—signs of illness—he grabbed his long rope, made a loop, swung it into the air, fired it around the steer’s neck, dismounted, grabbed a medicine kit from his saddle bag, injected the steer with an antibiotic, and within minutes was back on his horse, prowling some more.


Cody Crockett roping calves; Cody in July 2016.
ALICE FRANKLIN; ERIN CRISTA SMITH

Cody checked the windmills and water tanks. He examined the fences to see if any of them needed patching. He then drove over to the west pasture, where he dumped more cake on the ground for forty Angus heifers.

The heifers belonged to Sloan Everett, the 35-year-old husband of Liesl Austin Everett, a daughter of one of the Franklin’s owners. Sloan himself came from a prominent ranching family. His father, Jim Everett, runs the Everett Cattle Company, which owns four ranches, totaling nearly 19,000 acres, just outside the West Texas town of Breckenridge, about a four-hour drive south of the Franklin. Sloan helped his father manage the ranches, and by all accounts, he was a smart cowman. In October 2015, when the pastures in the Breckenridge area were turning bare from drought, he had received the Franklin family’s permission to ship some heifers to the west pasture, which had better grass at the time, and have them bred with bulls. Now the heifers were healthy and calving. Prowling through the herd that morning, Cody was especially attentive. Sloan had recently told Cody that he would soon be driving up to the Franklin to get a look at his livestock, and the last thing Cody wanted Sloan to see was a sluggish heifer or a sick baby calf barely able to stand.

AT THAT MOMENT, IT WAS SIMPLY IMPOSSIBLE TO IMAGINE THAT SOMETHING AWFUL WAS ALREADY HEADED THE FRANKLIN'S WAY.
Cody took a break. As he did every day, he called or texted his girlfriend, Sydney Wallace, who worked in Amarillo as a nurse in the emergency room of Baptist St. Anthony’s Hospital. Sydney was 23, slim and blond—her friends said she looked like Taylor Swift. Whenever she had a couple of days off, she loved visiting the Franklin to be with Cody, always bringing along her little white Maltese dog, Dale. In fact, Sydney was planning to drive to the Franklin later that week, and Cody couldn’t wait to see her. He had told his mother, Kristie, that he and Sydney had been talking about marriage—not soon, but someday. They had even Googled photos of wedding rings on his phone. “There’s no one like her,” Cody liked to say. “No one like my Syd.”

That afternoon, Cody worked more cattle. It was a glorious day on the Franklin, the temperatures mild and the wind a whispery breeze. Clouds drifted across the sky and birds turned circles in the air. As the day came to an end, the sun set slowly over the pastures, its reddish-violet hue spreading across the sky.

At that moment, it was simply impossible to imagine that something awful was already headed the Franklin’s way.

crosscrosscross
Everyone who knew Cody said he was born to be a cowboy. Both of his grandfathers worked as cowboys on ranches in the eastern Panhandle, and his 52-year-old father, Brock, is also a lifelong cowboy who began working on Panhandle ranches when he was a young teenager.

Brock and Kristie had raised Cody and his three siblings—his brothers, Clay and Ben, and his sister, Callie—on a small ranch just outside the dusty town of McLean (population 775), about twenty miles from the Franklin Ranch. All the Crockett children took to the cowboy life, but Cody was consumed with it. At the age of two, he was riding one of his father’s old quarter horses, and at three, he was roping dummies with a piggin’ string. When he was in elementary school, he was tagging along with Brock to spring brandings, where he roped calves and dragged them to the fire. “Even back then, Cody was throwing a good, flat loop, which isn’t easy to do,” says Brock, a stocky man who used to ride broncos in amateur rodeos. “Other cowboys would tell me that he was on his way to making a good hand. Out here, for a little boy, that’s as good a compliment as you can get.”

On Saturdays, Cody would lie on the floor in the living room, drink Dr Peppers with one of his buddies, and talk about the big ranches, like the Four Sixes, that he planned to work on one day. When older cowboys came over to the house to talk, he’d sit right beside them, his elbows on his knees. “You could almost see him making mental notes as they talked about what ropes they used or which trucks they liked,” says Kristie, who teaches second grade at the McLean public school. “My daddy [Bobby Thompson, who for many years was one of the cowboys on the Four Sixes,] once told him, ‘Cody, there’s a difference between working cattle and disturbing cattle.’ Cody used to repeat that line every chance he got.”

AT HIS GRADUATION CEREMONY, IN MAY 2015, CODY LEFT HIS DIPLOMA WEDGED BETWEEN TWO CHAIRS AND WAS AT THE RANCH EARLY THE NEXT MORNING.
During his high school years, his classmates named him Most Handsome and Best Dressed, even though he wore the same thing to school every day: a Western snap-button shirt, a Western belt, ironed blue jeans, boots from Amarillo’s Bustamante Cowboy Boots, and, of course, his cowboy hat. He was the star running back on the McLean Tigers’ six-man football team, good enough to play in junior college, people said. But cowboying was already his life. Sitting in a classroom, he’d get on his phone and buy hay for a local man who paid him to look after a small herd of cattle. In the late afternoons, no matter how long football practice lasted, he would break horses in a small arena next to his house. When his senior year came around, his parents asked him if he wanted a senior class ring. No, Cody said, he’d prefer a new pair of spurs. “He wore those spurs everywhere,” Kristie says. “It was a nice sound, listening to those rowels click against the floor.”

It was also during Cody’s senior year that a man named Joe Magee paid him a visit. The 69-year-old Magee is a longtime Panhandle cowman, his face as wrinkled as an old saddle. He makes leasing arrangements with the owners of ranches, including the Franklin, to run his cattle on their pastures. Magee had known the Crockett family for many years, and whenever he saw Cody at work, he’d let out a whistle. “Roping, herding, sorting, breaking colts—there wasn’t anything he couldn’t do,” Magee says. “And he was a ‘yes, sir–no, sir’ kind of young man, respectful to everyone, as honest as the day is long. I knew that I needed to hire him, because if I didn’t, someone else would.”

Magee told Cody he wanted him to be his full-time cowboy on the Franklin as soon as Cody graduated from high school. Cody was ecstatic. At his graduation ceremony, in May 2015, he left his diploma wedged between two chairs and was at the ranch early the next morning, working cattle. Magee paid him around $2,500 a month and also gave him a “beef”—a side of butchered, frozen beef for him to eat. (There’s a long tradition in the Panhandle that cowboys who work full-time on a ranch receive a beef each year from their employers.)

Considering that Cody worked seven days a week, he wasn’t exactly getting rich. He also had to pay for his own health insurance to cover any on-the-job injuries, like “horse wrecks” (when a horse falls on a cowboy). But he wasn’t complaining. “He was one of the hardest-working cowboys we had,” says Magee’s son Destry, who helps oversee his father’s business. “If we had told him to dig a hole to China, he’d have said ‘Yes, sir’ and gone running after a shovel, and he’d have had a smile on his face the whole time.”

In September 2015, when Cody was suffering from intense headaches and a high fever, his mother drove him to the emergency room at Baptist St. Anthony’s. Sydney Wallace walked up to his bed and said, “Hi, I’m your nurse.” Cody immediately flexed his biceps, hoping to impress her. Another nurse later slipped him Sydney’s number. When he called, Sydney said she’d let him take her hiking in the Palo Duro Canyon, but she wouldn’t go to dinner or to a movie until she got to know him better. “I laughed,” Kristie says. “I realized right then that Cody had met his match.”

Cody Crockett and Sydney Wallace
Cody Crockett and Sydney Wallace, in July 2016.
Erin Crista Smith
Sydney had grown up around Austin, spent her high school years in Monahans, a small town near Odessa, and then enrolled at West Texas A&M University in Canyon to study nursing. “She loved the pace and excitement of the emergency room,” says her mother, Lisa Sanchez. “She used to tell me that she wanted to move to Dallas to work in the trauma center at Parkland Hospital. And I’m sure she would have done it. But then she met Cody.”

On that first date, after their hike through the canyon, Sydney did let Cody take her to dinner, at Bracero’s, her favorite Mexican restaurant in Amarillo. The next day, he brought her to McLean to watch his little brother Ben play in a junior high football game. Within a week, they were an item. On nights she worked, he’d show up at the hospital with Taco Bell. On one of his trips to Amarillo, he stopped at a boutique called the English Rose and bought her some Kendra Scott jewelry. Sydney, in turn, bought him Cinch Western shirts and a pair of tennis shoes, which he’d never buy for himself, so he’d have something to put on at the end of the day when his feet hurt from wearing boots.

As she realized she was falling in love, Sydney traded in her small Kia Rio and bought a Chevy Traverse SUV, so she could better navigate the rutted dirt roads that led to the Franklin. At the ranch, Cody took her on horseback rides. They went swimming in the pool at the ranch headquarters. Sydney and her dog, Dale, often rode with Cody in the pickup to feed cattle. (She liked to jump out of the truck to open and shut the gates that led from one pasture to another.) One day, she went with him to a spring branding, where she castrated several bulls.

At night, they often drove into McLean to have supper with Cody’s family. (Some rural Texans still call lunch “dinner” and the evening meal “supper.”) Or they went to the Red River Steakhouse, where she would order a steak kebab and he would order a jalapeño bacon cheeseburger. One night they visited the dance hall in McLean—which the locals jokingly refer to as the McLean Country Club—and they two-stepped around the floor.

“What we loved about Sydney was that she just took to our way of life,” says Thacker Haynes, the pastor of the McLean United Methodist Church, who also owns a small ranch outside of town. “And, boy, did she have spunk.” One Sunday morning, Cody and Sydney came to church. As they were walking in, he introduced her to the pastor. “I said, ‘Cody, thank you for bringing your girlfriend.’ And Sydney replied, ‘He didn’t bring me. I brought him.’ ”

crosscrosscross
At some point, Cody also introduced Sydney to members of the Franklin family. One day, she got to meet Sloan Everett, the young Breckenridge rancher, and his wife, Liesl. Sloan and Liesl looked like the portrait of Texas ranch royalty. He was boyishly handsome, with sandy-colored hair, blue eyes, and an easy smile. Liesl was also blue-eyed and as elegant as a swan, her blond hair usually pulled back in a ponytail. They had two very young, blue-eyed children—a daughter named Scarlett Austin and a son named Samuel Sloan, who babbled cheerfully and loved being held.

Sloan was raised in Breckenridge. He attended Baylor University, graduating in 2004 with a double major in finance and entrepreneurship. He spent a couple of years in Oklahoma working as an auditor for ConocoPhillips and then moved to Dallas to be a financial analyst for Hunt Oil. In 2009, he met Liesl, who was five years younger. She too was a Baylor graduate, a fashion merchandising major who had moved to Dallas to work for the online division of Neiman Marcus.

Both Sloan and Liesl were devout Christians who unabashedly talked about God’s presence in their lives. At the start of their first date, in 2009, he spent a few minutes on the phone with two inner-city kids he mentored, arranging a time to pick them up for church. “When I got home that night, I called my parents and told them I had never met a guy with such character,” Liesl says. “He was different, genuinely kind and sincere. It was hard for me not to think about him.”

Sloan and Leisl EverettSloan with his daughter.
Sloan and Leisl Everett at their wedding, in July 2011; Sloan and his daughter Scarlett.
GRAY’S STUDIO; CAROLINE JURGENSEN

As they continued to date, Sloan told her that despite his promising future in the oil business, what he really wanted to do was return to Breckenridge to work on his family’s ranches. He took Liesl to his small North Dallas apartment one night, brought out his guitar, and played her “My Rifle, My Pony and Me” from the 1959 John Wayne western Rio Bravo. He read to her from one of his favorite books, Ben Green’s memoir Horse Tradin’. One afternoon, Liesl pinned a photo of Sloan on the wall of her cubicle at Neiman’s. He was in his ranch garb, his hat pulled down over his eyes. “I looked at that photo over and over, and I thought, ‘I want to marry that man,’ ” she says.

In July 2011, they did marry, at an outdoor ceremony on the Franklin, attended by more than two hundred friends and relatives. Liesl walked down the aisle to the theme song from the miniseries Lonesome Dove. After a Caribbean honeymoon, they moved into a three-bedroom home on one of the Everett ranches. Early in the mornings, Sloan would work cattle with the Everett cowboys, and in the late afternoons, he’d lift weights at the local gym or run on the high school track. At night, he’d drive to his parents’ house to talk with his father about ways to improve the ranches’ productivity and increase the size of the herds. And then he’d go home and work on his computer, putting the ranches’ business operations on QuickBooks or studying online reports about bulls that were for sale.

ONE AFTERNOON, LIESL PINNED A PHOTO OF SLOAN ON THE WALL OF HER CUBICLE AT NEIMAN’S. HE WAS IN HIS RANCH GARB, HIS HAT PULLED DOWN OVER HIS EYES. “I LOOKED AT THAT PHOTO AND I THOUGHT, ‘I WANT TO MARRY THAT MAN,’ ” SHE SAYS.
“Sloan was learning the cattle business from top to bottom,” says the elder Everett, who is 66. (Jim himself had left Breckenridge after high school to attend college and law school, and he had worked briefly as a prosecutor for the Dallas County district attorney’s office before returning to Breckenridge to take over the family’s cattle company.) “He was so smart and so thorough. There was no doubt in my mind that when the time came for me to retire, the ranches were going to be in very good hands.”

In fact, Sloan was so conscientious about his job that he regularly drove to the Franklin just to check on that small herd of heifers that he had put on the west pasture. Liesl and the children usually came with him so they could spend time on the ranch and also see her parents in Amarillo.

This past February, after Cody let him know that the heifers were starting to calve, Sloan talked to Liesl, who was three months pregnant with their third child, and they decided to travel with the kids to Amarillo on March 3. From there, Sloan planned to go with Liesl’s father and her brothers on a quick two-day ski trip to Taos. He told Liesl that when he got back, he wanted to swing by the Franklin.

Maybe we can get there Sunday afternoon, March 5, Sloan said. Or Monday, March 6.

Sounds good to me, Liesl said.

THE PANHANDLE FAMILY TRADITION

Video Player
00:0000:00
Urban Texans tend to think cowboying is a vanishing way of life. But in the Panhandle, cowboys still raise their children to become cowboys themselves. Here, Sy Brown, who works the Combs-Worley Ranch near the Franklin, takes his two young sons out to the pastures to learn the trade.


After sending his March 1 email about the midlatitude cyclone, Todd Lindley, the National Weather Service meteorologist, could think about little else. He kept his eyes glued on his computer screens as the storm system, which was still 15,000 to 20,000 feet in the atmosphere, raced over the Pacific Coast. He talked extensively to Greg Murdoch, a National Weather Service senior forecaster who is based in Midland. They studied the movement of the cyclone’s “low-level thermal ridge,” and they double-checked the temperatures and relative humidity that were forecast for March 6. The day was definitely going to be hot and dry. Lindley sighed. The entire southern Great Plains was turning into a tinderbox.

On March 4, the National Weather Service began issuing warnings to western Kansas, western Oklahoma, and the Texas Panhandle about the potential for wildfires. In Texas, officials with the Texas A&M Forest Service made sure their firefighting aircraft—single-engine air tankers that can drop six to eight hundred gallons of thick red fire retardant per flight—were completely fueled and ready to fly. The forest service officials also ordered nearly thirty of their best firefighters, some from as far away as East Texas, to travel to the Panhandle. Meanwhile, in the rural towns, members of the volunteer fire departments double-checked their “grass rigs,” customized one-ton trucks that carry four hundred gallons of water and can move quickly through off-road terrain.

Early on the morning of March 6, as the midlatitude cyclone reached the Rocky Mountains, the winds began tumbling toward the ground, and they were indeed gusting up to 50 miles an hour—equivalent to the wind speed of a decent-sized tropical storm. Around 11:30 a.m., the winds reached the southern Great Plains. In Beaver County, Oklahoma, a power line started swinging in the wind. A shower of sparks fell to the ground and a spot fire sprang up, the size of a fist. Usually such a small fire stays “benign,” to use the parlance of wildfire specialists, and quickly dies out. But pushed by the wind, this fire kept growing, the flames wrapping around the wilted grass, and it was soon on the run, galloping eastward across an open range.

March 6 fire on the plains.
Panhandle fire, March 6, 2017.
Hoover Volunteer Fire Department
Within an hour, there were reports of half a dozen more grass fires in Oklahoma and Kansas. Around 1:45 p.m., a couple of spot fires were seen three miles north of Amarillo, along U.S. 287. They were a mile and a half apart and most likely had been caused by sparks from a chain being dragged along the pavement by a truck or trailer. The two fires quickly merged and turned into one large fire. Brad Smith, a Texas A&M Forest Service wildfire analyst, drove to the scene. By the time he got there, the fire was at least three miles wide and the flames at the front were twenty feet high. It was moving at 6 to 7 miles per hour, as fast as Smith had ever seen a wildfire move on the Texas Plains.

Around 2:30 p.m., there was a report of another Texas fire, this one near the town of Perryton, in the northeast corner of the Panhandle. John Erickson—a 73-year-old rancher who also writes the best-selling Hank the Cowdog children’s book series about a smelly but lovable cowdog that lives on a Panhandle ranch—drove his pickup to the top of a bluff to get a look at it. Over the years, Erickson had seen his share of prairie fires. In The Case of the Blazing Sky, his fifty-first Hank book (Erickson has published 69 of them since 1983), he has Hank tell his young readers, “I guess you know what strong wind does to a fire. In dry weather, it will turn a little fire into a roaring monster . . . a roaring, leaping, hissing monster.” That afternoon, standing on the bluff, Erickson realized a monster was on its way. He watched the fire triple in size. The smoke, he would later say, looked like a cloud from an atom bomb explosion. He drove back to his ranch house and told his wife, Kris, to pack some clothes in a suitcase. They needed to get out of there as soon as they could.

Along with the Texas A&M Forest Service firefighters, at least a dozen Panhandle volunteer fire departments arrived to do battle with the fires near Amarillo and Perryton. The men and women stood on their grass rigs and shot streams of water at the sides of the fires to keep them from getting wider. Using road graders and bulldozers, they built firebreaks to slow the blazes’ forward momentum or divert the fires away from populated areas.


SOURCES: Texas A&M Forest Service, National Weather Service
MAP BY DARLA CAMERON

But the two fires were relentless. They jumped over many of the firebreaks and hurtled across pasture after pasture—scorching hundreds of thousands of acres. The fires burned down barns, outbuildings, and ranch houses. (Erickson lost his house and his adjoining office, but he did escape with his Mac, which contained his most recent unpublished Hank stories.) They swept over bawling cattle and panicked horses. Pronghorn, racing away from the fires, ran straight into barbed-wire fences, decapitating themselves. In the town of Canadian, a young man named Cade Koch left his job at a hardware store and headed for his home in Lipscomb, 25 miles away, so that he could check on his wife, who they had just learned was pregnant. He tried to drive through a thick cloud of smoke that was coming from the Perryton fire, but the truck stalled. Cade, who was only 25 years old, suffocated from smoke inhalation.

And then, about 3:45 that afternoon, a report came in of a third fire in Texas, this one in the southeastern part of the Panhandle, near the town of Lefors. It was headed due east, straight toward the Franklin Ranch, six miles away.


As promised, Sydney had driven out to see Cody. And as always, she had brought along Dale, her dog. While riding through the north pastures with Cody, she had Snapchatted a photo of Dale sticking his head out the window of Cody’s pickup, looking at some yearlings.

By 4 p.m., they were back at Cody’s house. They saw a plume of smoke in the distance. It looked as if a small plane might have crashed several miles away. At 4:06, Cody got a call from his father, Brock, who was at his ranch, standing outside by his barn. He too was looking at the smoke. Cody told his father that he was going to drive to the western side of the Franklin to see if a fire was threatening any of the ranch’s cattle.

USUALLY SUCH A SMALL FIRE STAYS “BENIGN,” TO USE THE PARLANCE OF WILDFIRE SPECIALISTS. BUT PUSHED BY THE WIND, THIS FIRE KEPT GROWING, THE FLAMES WRAPPING AROUND THE WILTED GRASS, AND IT WAS SOON ON THE RUN.
Cody saddled and trailered one of his favorite horses, Junior, a bay-colored gelding with a black mane and black tail. Meanwhile, Sydney hopped into the passenger seat of the pickup. If he tried to persuade her to stay behind, she was having none of it. (“She wasn’t one who was told, ‘You stay here,’ ” one of her friends would later say.) But she did one thing that was out of the ordinary: she left Dale behind in the house.

Cody drove west for a couple of miles on one of the ranch’s dirt roads. When he and Sydney reached the west pasture, he came to a sudden stop and no doubt stared through the windshield in bewilderment—because there, standing in the pasture, was Sloan Everett.

Earlier that afternoon, Sloan, Liesl, their children, and Liesl’s mother, Jane, had driven to the Franklin from Amarillo. They had arrived around 3 p.m., and by 4, they too were looking at the smoke on the horizon. Sloan had told Liesl that he was going to take a quick trip out to the west pasture to make sure his heifers and calves were not in the line of the fire.

He had driven one of the ranch’s four-wheelers to the pasture. With his cellphone, he had taken a few photos of the smoke, which was still far away and looked to be only a couple of football fields in width. But by the time Cody and Sydney pulled into the west pasture, at around 4:30, conditions were quickly changing. The smoke was getting closer, and below the smoke was a visible line of fire. Sloan called Liesl and told her that she, her mother, and the kids needed to leave the ranch immediately.

Fire photo by Sloan Everett
A photo of the March 6 fire on the Franklin Ranch taken by Sloan just minutes before he attempted to save his cattle.
Sloan, however, wasn’t going anywhere. Neither was Cody. The young rancher and the young cowboy had devoted their lives to taking care of cattle, and they were not about to let those forty heifers and the newly born calves burn to death. “I’m not sure if city people will ever understand this,” says Magee, Cody’s boss. “But out here, you get up every morning and you think about what you need to do that’s best for your cows. That’s your responsibility. You look after cattle. You don’t think twice about it.”

Sloan and Cody decided that the best way to save the heifers and calves was to move them to the south, so they’d be below the fire as it swept eastward. Cody unloaded Junior. He most likely told Sydney to drive the truck to a gate on the southern side of the west pasture and blow the truck’s horn. Most of the cattle, thinking they were about to be fed, would have followed the truck. Cody, who was on Junior, and Sloan, who was on the four-wheeler, trailed behind the herd, pushing along the heavily pregnant heifers that were moving more slowly.

They must have constantly been looking over their shoulders, staring at the smoke, trying to track the fire’s progress. Sloan made another quick call to Liesl to make sure that they had left the ranch. (They had.) But the call went straight to Liesl’s voicemail. (Cell service on Panhandle ranches is notoriously spotty.) When Liesl later played back the message, she could hear Sloan calling to his heifers, making a yip yip yip sound. At the end of the message, she heard him say “Liesl?” And then the line went dead.

The gate at the southern end of the west pasture led to the neighboring Gething Ranch. Sydney probably jumped out of the truck to open the gate, and the heifers trudged into an empty pasture, their big bodies swaying and their heads swinging. The calves, some of them only a week old, trotted next to their mothers. Sloan, Cody, and Sydney had to have felt a sense of relief—perhaps even jubilation. They could see the smoke was headed due east. They—and the cattle—were out of the line of fire.


But at around 5:30, the wind inexplicably shifted, ever so slightly. Instead of blowing straight out of the west, it started coming from the northwest. Panhandle residents standing in their front yards would barely have noticed the change. But on the Gething Ranch, Sloan, Cody, and Sydney must have immediately sensed what was happening. The fire, now veering in a southeasterly direction, was moving straight toward them.

Cody knew the Gething well. As a teenager, he’d done “day work” (what cowboys call part-time work) on the ranch. He knew its pastures were dotted with sand hills, which look somewhat like sand dunes next to a seashore, except that the hills are covered with grass and scrub brush. And the sand hills offered a chance of survival. If they could get on top of a hill, it was possible that the fire would stay in a draw, go around the hill, and miss them altogether.

There is no way of knowing exactly what happened next. But here is one likely scenario. Cody and Sydney climbed onto Junior and headed up the closest hill, leaving the truck and trailer behind. Sloan was right behind them on his four-wheeler. Sydney wrapped her arms around Cody’s waist, hanging on for dear life. When Cody turned in his saddle, he could see the fire. It was writhing up the hill, spitting red sparks, with columns of throat-clogging smoke swirling in front of the flames. The burning twigs on the bushes crackled like gunfire.

At some point, Sloan lost control of the four-wheeler and was thrown to the ground. (The four-wheeler was later found tangled in a barbed-wire fence.) Cody and Sydney also ended up on the ground. Either a terrified Junior bucked them off his back, or the horse stumbled in the sand, fell to his knees, and rolled. Sloan, Cody, and Sydney did the only thing they could do: they ran. Soon, smoke enveloped them like a gray-black curtain, shutting out the world. They couldn’t see or breathe. Disoriented, they ran in different directions, gasping for air, pumping their legs through the sand as fast as they could.

They didn’t get far. Within seconds, the flames were on top of them.


The fire kept pushing eastward until the volunteer fire departments and the forest service eventually got it under control. On a bluff above the Franklin, several cowboys gathered. Joe Magee, his son Destry, and Cody’s father, Brock, were also there. Because Cody hadn’t returned their texts or calls for the past couple of hours, they knew something was wrong. They hooked their thumbs over their belts and squinted toward the distant burned-out pastures. They didn’t say much.

One of Magee’s cowboys, 37-year-old Sy Brown, pulled up in his truck. When he’s not working on a Magee ranch, Brown serves as the volunteer fire chief for the town of Lefors, not far from where the fire had started. Brown told the other men that he had just driven past the ranch headquarters, which the fire had skirted (partly because the lawns around the homes and the outbuildings were well watered, freshly mowed, and contained no dry grass). He also had driven through the west pasture and through some of the northern pastures, but he hadn’t spotted Cody, Sydney, or Sloan. “I don’t know,” Brown said quietly. “Maybe they went south, to the Gething.”

Evening was coming on. The sun was dropping behind the horizon. Joe, Destry, and Brock piled into a truck and drove the fence line between the Franklin and the Gething. Huddled against a corner fence was Junior. His hair was burned down to the skin and his saddle blanket was smoldering. He was in such pain he couldn’t look up. Brock got out of the truck and jerked the saddle and saddle blanket off the horse. Joe leaned against the pickup and looked at Brock. “We’ve got a wreck on our hands,” he said.

A few of the cowboys spread out in a single line, thirty or forty yards apart, and they started walking through the Gething pasture, using the flashlights on their cellphones to guide their way. The ground was still warm from the fire, the heat seeping up through their boots, but they kept walking. Every few yards or so, they’d do an old-fashioned “brush call”: shouting “woo-woo” to one another so that they knew they were maintaining a straight line. (When working brushy pastures, looking for stray cattle, cowboys on horseback have long used the same call.) As they ascended one of the sand hills, they heard a feeble cry.

“Hey.”

It was Cody.

Brock and the others ran up the sand hill. Sydney was on the ground, curled up like a kitten, lifeless. Forty yards away, on his back, was Cody. His clothes had been burned off. The only things remaining on his body were his leather Western belt, his Bustamante boots, and the spurs he’d gotten his senior year of high school.

“Dad, I’m sorry,” Cody said. “I’m sorry.”

“Son, you did nothing wrong,” Brock replied, cradling Cody’s head in his arms.

Cody’s skin was almost black from his burns, his hair gone. He told his father he was cold. Brock stripped off his shirt and wrapped it around his son.

“I’ve come a long way, Dad,” said Cody, who seemed to be getting delirious. “I know, honey,” Brock said. He then called Kristie and said, “You need to get on out here. It’s bad.”

Fifty yards away, one of the other cowboys, 32-year-old Derek Kincannon, found Sloan. He too was naked except for his boots and belt. “Sir, please help me,” Sloan whispered. Kincannon had no idea what to do. He finally held Sloan’s hand and said, “You just keep breathing. Help is on its way.”

By then, Liesl had returned with her mother and the children to their ranch house. Someone called and let them know that Sloan and Cody had been found alive and that medical helicopters were on their way to the Gething to transport the men to a hospital in Amarillo.

More cowboys and volunteer firefighters got to the sand hill in their pickups and grass rigs. They formed a circle with the trucks and turned on their brights so the helicopters would know where to land. When the first helicopter touched down, a paramedic ran over to Sloan. He took one look at him and began reciting the 23rd Psalm. Sloan moved his lips. The paramedic thought he was trying to recite the psalm along with him.

By the time the second helicopter arrived, Kristie and Cody’s two brothers, Clay and Ben, were at his side. Paramedics lifted Cody onto a backboard. “Thank y’all for coming,” Cody said to the paramedics just before they sedated him.

Sloan died before he got to the hospital. Cody died minutes after he was wheeled into the emergency room. Back at the Gething, a justice of the peace arrived to examine Sydney’s body and officially pronounce her cause of death. She was wrapped in a sheet, placed in the backseat of a pickup, and driven to a funeral home in the nearby town of Pampa. Meanwhile, one of Magee’s cowboys went looking for Junior. He shot the horse in the head, putting him out of his misery.

Everyone prepared to go home. In the darkness, some heifers and calves began ambling from the Gething to the open gate that led to the west pasture. It was Sloan’s herd. Incredibly, except for three calves, all of them had escaped the fire—apparently, they had kept moving south away from the flames—and now they were returning to the pasture that they knew best. Against all odds, Cody, Sydney, and Sloan had saved the cattle.

Video Player
00:0000:00

The next morning was chilly but beautiful. The wind was gone, and the skies clear except for a few lingering wisps of smoke. As friends gathered at the Crockett home, Brock went off to feed cattle and patch some fence at his ranch. “That’s what you do out here,” he says. “You get up and do your job.” When he got home that afternoon, he opened a hospital bag and pulled out Cody’s belt, boots, and spurs. He set them on the floor next to his own bed.

All that Liesl got back was Sloan’s cellphone, which, incredibly, was still working (he had carried it in a waterproof and fireproof phone case), and his wedding ring, which had soot on it. Sydney’s mother, Lisa, received Sydney’s Apple Watch and a pair of earrings. Two days after the fire, Lisa drove up to the Panhandle with her husband. Along with Sydney’s father, Stephen Wallace, and his wife, they went to the Gething pasture with Brock and Kristie. At the spot where Sydney had been found, Lisa and Stephen scooped some sand into bottles. “Sometimes I ask myself, ‘How could this have happened?’ ” Lisa says. “Three wonderful young people, taken away by a wild fire. How could such a thing have happened?”

I'M NOT SURE IF CITY PEOPLE WILL EVER UNDERSTAND THIS. BUT OUT HERE, YOU GET UP EVERY MORNING AND THINK ABOUT WHAT YOU NEED TO DO FOR YOUR COWS. THAT'S YOUR RESPONSIBILITY. YOU LOOK AFTER CATTLE. YOU DON'T THINK TWICE ABOUT IT.
Lisa brought Dale back to her home. At a Methodist church in Round Rock, north of Austin, where Sydney had been baptized as a baby, close to 400 mourners attended her funeral. Propped on top of the casket was a photo of Sydney and Cody. During Sloan’s funeral at Breckenridge’s First Baptist Church, which was attended by more than 750 mourners, a video was played of Sloan singing “My Rifle, My Pony and Me.” In their eulogies, his friends described him as the finest man they had ever met. His father, Jim, spoke last. “I know the Lord was there with him in that fire,” he said, “and I know that He protected him from the pain, and that He was waiting there to take him with Him into indescribable joy.” For several seconds, there was silence as Jim tried not to sob.

At the One Way Church in McLean (the biggest church in town), more than a thousand people showed up for Cody’s funeral, the crowd so large that it spilled onto the street. The fourteen pallbearers—his two brothers and twelve of his cowboy friends, young men with names such as Cutter and Kaleton—wore their best cowboy boots, starched jeans, starched white button-down shirts adorned with a single carnation, and their cowboy hats. In his message, Pastor Haynes told the crowd, “Cody was doing what he loved to do. . . . A better cowboy you cannot find.” At the end of the service, the saddle that had been on Junior the night of the fire was placed on top of Cody’s casket. There was a procession to the city cemetery, and Cody and his saddle were buried next to the graves of his great-grandparents.

The tragedy reverberated through America’s rural communities. On Facebook pages and websites devoted to farming and ranching, there were countless postings about Sloan’s, Cody’s, and Sydney’s deaths. (“Only the good die young,” someone wrote. “Maybe God needed them to help with ‘the cattle on a thousand hills,’ ” wrote someone else, quoting from the Book of Psalms.) Amy Dean, a grandmother from Colorado, wrote and recorded “Cowboys With Wings,” a song memorializing Sloan, Cody, and Sydney. It was the first song she’d ever released. An Amarillo Christian rock musician, Matt Dietz, recorded a tribute song that he titled “Amarillo Burned.”

People who had never met Sloan, Cody, or Sydney mailed cards and letters to their families. Cowboys from as far away as Waco showed up at the Crockett ranch and asked Brock if he needed any help. Throughout the southern Great Plains, families who were affected by the fires were overwhelmed with donations, receiving everything from bales of hay to covered-dish suppers. Teenagers who belonged to 4-H clubs and Future Farmers of America chapters helped with the cleanup. “Some girls from Oklahoma State who were on spring break showed up and asked if they could clean ranch houses,” Magee says. He pauses and shakes his head. “There’s a lot of love among ranching people. But Lord, it can be a tough business. Lord, it can be tough.”


Crosses mark where Cody, Sydney, and Sloan were found on the Gething Ranch.
Alice Franklin

On that single March afternoon, at least 32 fires broke out in the southern Great Plains, scorching more than 1.2 million acres, “the largest individual Plains fire outbreak documented in the modern era,” says Lindley, the National Weather Service meteorologist. The amount of damage totaled tens of millions of dollars. Scattered throughout the pastures were at least a couple of thousand dead cows. Other cows and calves were burned so badly—“staggering around like broken toys,” wrote one reporter—that they were shot and carried by bulldozers to large pits for burial. Besides the deaths in Texas, a 63-year-old Oklahoma woman suffered a fatal heart attack as she and her husband tried to put out a fire that threatened their farm. In Kansas, a trucker suffocated when his semi jackknifed on a highway that was blanketed with smoke.

Ironically, in mid-March, bountiful showers passed over the Panhandle, and by the first of May, carpets of new grass were already sprouting up in the blackened pastures. At the Franklin Ranch, Liesl’s family hosted a steak dinner to honor the cowboys, the volunteer firefighters, and the paramedics who had been at their ranch and at the Gething during the blaze. Everyone tried to make small talk around the tables. A couple of the cowboys began to say how much they were going to miss Sloan, Cody, and Sydney, but they got choked up.

Before the dinner ended, at about 9 p.m.—the cowboys had to get home to bed to be ready for work the next morning—someone asked Liesl about her new baby, due in August. Liesl said she was having a boy.

What are you going to name him? someone else asked.

Well, Liesl said, since Samuel Sloan is already named after his daddy, she wanted to name the baby after a young man she knew who was never going to have kids. A young man whom she deeply admired, she said, who during his life had been earnest and kind and courageous. A young man who deserved some sort of legacy.

There was a silence. “I’m going to call my baby Cody,” she said.

Copyright © Texas Monthly 2017. All rights reserved.
ShareThis Copy and Paste MENU THE DAY THE FIRE CAME   A tale of love and loss on the Panhandle plains. JULY 2017 | by SKIP HOLLANDSWORTH VIDEOS BY JOHN CARRITHERS Video Player On the morning of March 1, Todd Lindley, a forty-year-old science and operations officer with the National Weather Service, walked into his office in Norman, Oklahoma, and sat down in front of his four computer screens. Lindley specializes in weather on the southern Great Plains, a mostly flat five-hundred-mile expanse that runs from Kansas to just below the Panhandle of Texas. That morning, on one of the screens, he noticed a storm system that meteorologists call a “midlatitude cyclone,” a pinwheel of clouds spinning counterclockwise over the open waters of the Pacific, two thousand miles away. Lindley wheeled his chair closer to that screen and typed a few commands on the keyboard. The computer projected that the midlatitude cyclone would reach the northwestern coastline of the United States by March 3, head toward the Rocky Mountains, and swoop down on to the southern Great Plains on March 6, bringing with it wind gusts of at least 50 miles an hour. Lindley stared at his screen for several seconds. Then he murmured a single word. “Fire.” For the past couple of months, Lindley had been worried about the possibility of a prairie fire sweeping across the southern Great Plains. After enduring several years of drought, the entire area had received a large amount of rain during the spring and summer of 2016, which in turn had produced an immensity of grass, three to four feet high in some pastures. Now, in these final days of winter, that grass was dormant and dry as hay. All that was needed to set that grass ablaze was a few sparks from an untended campfire, a passing train engine, a malfunctioning power line, or a cigarette butt thrown out a car window. On an especially windy day, that fire could spiral out of control within minutes. I GUESS YOU KNOW WHAT A STRONG WIND DOES TO A FIRE. IN DRY WEATHER, IT WILL TURN A LITTLE FIRE INTO A ROARING MONSTER...A ROARING, LEAPING, HISSING MONSTER. Already in January and February, the Panhandle had seen several small fires. In Amarillo, a utility pole had snapped and set off a fire behind a Toot’n Totum that burned an acre of grassland. In nearby Pampa, a grass fire had closed two highways for an afternoon, and another grass fire had advanced toward the town of Tulia, prompting the evacuation of a neighborhood before it was put out. But Lindley sensed that March 6 was going to be different. Besides the high winds, temperatures were expected to soar to 80 degrees that day, about 20 degrees above normal, and the relative humidity was supposed to drop into the single digits. With such hot, dry, and windy conditions, Lindley suspected the southern Plains might get not just one fire. It could get multiple fires, a phenomenon known as a firestorm. The only question was where those fires would hit. Lindley quickly sent an email to other National Weather Service meteorologists, state forestry officials, and fire chiefs who work western Kansas, western Oklahoma, and the Texas Panhandle, notifying them of the computer projections. “Current solutions highlight the ejection of a shortwave trough and a highly amplified thermal ridge near the 100th meridian,” he wrote. “Appears to be worthy of an early heads up!” One of Lindley’s co-workers walked into his office and asked if he really was convinced a fire was coming. Lindley just nodded his head. It could be a long day, he said. A very, very long day. As Lindley was sending his email, Cody Crockett, a twenty-year-old cowboy, was at work on the nine-thousand-acre Franklin Ranch, seventy or so miles northeast of Amarillo. The Franklin is one of the more famous ranches in the eastern Panhandle. Purchased in 1936 by Oliver Morris Franklin, the inventor of the vaccine for blackleg, a virulent disease that kills cattle, the ranch is now owned by three of his granddaughters (two of whom live in Amarillo, the other in Pampa), who tend to bring their families to visit on weekends and for vacations. The Franklin is a beautiful spread, its main house and guest house nestled in a tree-lined draw, near a pond and a gurgling creek. There’s a swimming pool and a tennis court. Throughout the ranch, wildlife abounds: white-tailed deer, roadrunners, quail, doves, and wild turkey. In the distance, cattle quietly graze on pastures that stretch out like a vast sea. Cody was as lean as a sapling, six-feet-one and 185 pounds. He lived in a two-bedroom foreman’s house about a half mile from the ranch headquarters. He was almost always up and dressed by sunrise. He’d down a bowl of cereal—he preferred an off-brand version of Lucky Charms—walk outside to feed the ranch’s horses, and then saddle one of the horses, load him into a trailer hooked to a flatbed pickup truck, and head for the pastures. That morning, Cody drove to the Franklin’s north pastures so he could check on eight hundred steers that had been shipped to the ranch a couple of weeks earlier. Each of the steers weighed around 450 pounds, and Cody’s job was to have them fattened up to at least 750 pounds by October, when they would be shipped to a feed yard and then on to the slaughterhouse. He drove slowly through the pastures, blowing the truck’s horn to get the steers’ attention. Attached to the bed of his pickup was a large metal feeder that dumped pellets of high-protein cow cake on the ground for the steers to eat. At some point that morning he untrailered his horse and went “prowling,” as cowboys like to say. Whenever he saw a steer with its head down or ears drooping—signs of illness—he grabbed his long rope, made a loop, swung it into the air, fired it around the steer’s neck, dismounted, grabbed a medicine kit from his saddle bag, injected the steer with an antibiotic, and within minutes was back on his horse, prowling some more. Cody Crockett roping calves; Cody in July 2016. ALICE FRANKLIN; ERIN CRISTA SMITH Cody checked the windmills and water tanks. He examined the fences to see if any of them needed patching. He then drove over to the west pasture, where he dumped more cake on the ground for forty Angus heifers. The heifers belonged to Sloan Everett, the 35-year-old husband of Liesl Austin Everett, a daughter of one of the Franklin’s owners. Sloan himself came from a prominent ranching family. His father, Jim Everett, runs the Everett Cattle Company, which owns four ranches, totaling nearly 19,000 acres, just outside the West Texas town of Breckenridge, about a four-hour drive south of the Franklin. Sloan helped his father manage the ranches, and by all accounts, he was a smart cowman. In October 2015, when the pastures in the Breckenridge area were turning bare from drought, he had received the Franklin family’s permission to ship some heifers to the west pasture, which had better grass at the time, and have them bred with bulls. Now the heifers were healthy and calving. Prowling through the herd that morning, Cody was especially attentive. Sloan had recently told Cody that he would soon be driving up to the Franklin to get a look at his livestock, and the last thing Cody wanted Sloan to see was a sluggish heifer or a sick baby calf barely able to stand. AT THAT MOMENT, IT WAS SIMPLY IMPOSSIBLE TO IMAGINE THAT SOMETHING AWFUL WAS ALREADY HEADED THE FRANKLIN'S WAY. Cody took a break. As he did every day, he called or texted his girlfriend, Sydney Wallace, who worked in Amarillo as a nurse in the emergency room of Baptist St. Anthony’s Hospital. Sydney was 23, slim and blond—her friends said she looked like Taylor Swift. Whenever she had a couple of days off, she loved visiting the Franklin to be with Cody, always bringing along her little white Maltese dog, Dale. In fact, Sydney was planning to drive to the Franklin later that week, and Cody couldn’t wait to see her. He had told his mother, Kristie, that he and Sydney had been talking about marriage—not soon, but someday. They had even Googled photos of wedding rings on his phone. “There’s no one like her,” Cody liked to say. “No one like my Syd.” That afternoon, Cody worked more cattle. It was a glorious day on the Franklin, the temperatures mild and the wind a whispery breeze. Clouds drifted across the sky and birds turned circles in the air. As the day came to an end, the sun set slowly over the pastures, its reddish-violet hue spreading across the sky. At that moment, it was simply impossible to imagine that something awful was already headed the Franklin’s way. Everyone who knew Cody said he was born to be a cowboy. Both of his grandfathers worked as cowboys on ranches in the eastern Panhandle, and his 52-year-old father, Brock, is also a lifelong cowboy who began working on Panhandle ranches when he was a young teenager. Brock and Kristie had raised Cody and his three siblings—his brothers, Clay and Ben, and his sister, Callie—on a small ranch just outside the dusty town of McLean (population 775), about twenty miles from the Franklin Ranch. All the Crockett children took to the cowboy life, but Cody was consumed with it. At the age of two, he was riding one of his father’s old quarter horses, and at three, he was roping dummies with a piggin’ string. When he was in elementary school, he was tagging along with Brock to spring brandings, where he roped calves and dragged them to the fire. “Even back then, Cody was throwing a good, flat loop, which isn’t easy to do,” says Brock, a stocky man who used to ride broncos in amateur rodeos. “Other cowboys would tell me that he was on his way to making a good hand. Out here, for a little boy, that’s as good a compliment as you can get.” On Saturdays, Cody would lie on the floor in the living room, drink Dr Peppers with one of his buddies, and talk about the big ranches, like the Four Sixes, that he planned to work on one day. When older cowboys came over to the house to talk, he’d sit right beside them, his elbows on his knees. “You could almost see him making mental notes as they talked about what ropes they used or which trucks they liked,” says Kristie, who teaches second grade at the McLean public school. “My daddy [Bobby Thompson, who for many years was one of the cowboys on the Four Sixes,] once told him, ‘Cody, there’s a difference between working cattle and disturbing cattle.’ Cody used to repeat that line every chance he got.” AT HIS GRADUATION CEREMONY, IN MAY 2015, CODY LEFT HIS DIPLOMA WEDGED BETWEEN TWO CHAIRS AND WAS AT THE RANCH EARLY THE NEXT MORNING. During his high school years, his classmates named him Most Handsome and Best Dressed, even though he wore the same thing to school every day: a Western snap-button shirt, a Western belt, ironed blue jeans, boots from Amarillo’s Bustamante Cowboy Boots, and, of course, his cowboy hat. He was the star running back on the McLean Tigers’ six-man football team, good enough to play in junior college, people said. But cowboying was already his life. Sitting in a classroom, he’d get on his phone and buy hay for a local man who paid him to look after a small herd of cattle. In the late afternoons, no matter how long football practice lasted, he would break horses in a small arena next to his house. When his senior year came around, his parents asked him if he wanted a senior class ring. No, Cody said, he’d prefer a new pair of spurs. “He wore those spurs everywhere,” Kristie says. “It was a nice sound, listening to those rowels click against the floor.” It was also during Cody’s senior year that a man named Joe Magee paid him a visit. The 69-year-old Magee is a longtime Panhandle cowman, his face as wrinkled as an old saddle. He makes leasing arrangements with the owners of ranches, including the Franklin, to run his cattle on their pastures. Magee had known the Crockett family for many years, and whenever he saw Cody at work, he’d let out a whistle. “Roping, herding, sorting, breaking colts—there wasn’t anything he couldn’t do,” Magee says. “And he was a ‘yes, sir–no, sir’ kind of young man, respectful to everyone, as honest as the day is long. I knew that I needed to hire him, because if I didn’t, someone else would.” Magee told Cody he wanted him to be his full-time cowboy on the Franklin as soon as Cody graduated from high school. Cody was ecstatic. At his graduation ceremony, in May 2015, he left his diploma wedged between two chairs and was at the ranch early the next morning, working cattle. Magee paid him around $2,500 a month and also gave him a “beef”—a side of butchered, frozen beef for him to eat. (There’s a long tradition in the Panhandle that cowboys who work full-time on a ranch receive a beef each year from their employers.) Considering that Cody worked seven days a week, he wasn’t exactly getting rich. He also had to pay for his own health insurance to cover any on-the-job injuries, like “horse wrecks” (when a horse falls on a cowboy). But he wasn’t complaining. “He was one of the hardest-working cowboys we had,” says Magee’s son Destry, who helps oversee his father’s business. “If we had told him to dig a hole to China, he’d have said ‘Yes, sir’ and gone running after a shovel, and he’d have had a smile on his face the whole time.” In September 2015, when Cody was suffering from intense headaches and a high fever, his mother drove him to the emergency room at Baptist St. Anthony’s. Sydney Wallace walked up to his bed and said, “Hi, I’m your nurse.” Cody immediately flexed his biceps, hoping to impress her. Another nurse later slipped him Sydney’s number. When he called, Sydney said she’d let him take her hiking in the Palo Duro Canyon, but she wouldn’t go to dinner or to a movie until she got to know him better. “I laughed,” Kristie says. “I realized right then that Cody had met his match.” Cody Crockett and Sydney Wallace, in July 2016. Erin Crista Smith Sydney had grown up around Austin, spent her high school years in Monahans, a small town near Odessa, and then enrolled at West Texas A&M University in Canyon to study nursing. “She loved the pace and excitement of the emergency room,” says her mother, Lisa Sanchez. “She used to tell me that she wanted to move to Dallas to work in the trauma center at Parkland Hospital. And I’m sure she would have done it. But then she met Cody.” On that first date, after their hike through the canyon, Sydney did let Cody take her to dinner, at Bracero’s, her favorite Mexican restaurant in Amarillo. The next day, he brought her to McLean to watch his little brother Ben play in a junior high football game. Within a week, they were an item. On nights she worked, he’d show up at the hospital with Taco Bell. On one of his trips to Amarillo, he stopped at a boutique called the English Rose and bought her some Kendra Scott jewelry. Sydney, in turn, bought him Cinch Western shirts and a pair of tennis shoes, which he’d never buy for himself, so he’d have something to put on at the end of the day when his feet hurt from wearing boots. As she realized she was falling in love, Sydney traded in her small Kia Rio and bought a Chevy Traverse SUV, so she could better navigate the rutted dirt roads that led to the Franklin. At the ranch, Cody took her on horseback rides. They went swimming in the pool at the ranch headquarters. Sydney and her dog, Dale, often rode with Cody in the pickup to feed cattle. (She liked to jump out of the truck to open and shut the gates that led from one pasture to another.) One day, she went with him to a spring branding, where she castrated several bulls. At night, they often drove into McLean to have supper with Cody’s family. (Some rural Texans still call lunch “dinner” and the evening meal “supper.”) Or they went to the Red River Steakhouse, where she would order a steak kebab and he would order a jalapeño bacon cheeseburger. One night they visited the dance hall in McLean—which the locals jokingly refer to as the McLean Country Club—and they two-stepped around the floor. “What we loved about Sydney was that she just took to our way of life,” says Thacker Haynes, the pastor of the McLean United Methodist Church, who also owns a small ranch outside of town. “And, boy, did she have spunk.” One Sunday morning, Cody and Sydney came to church. As they were walking in, he introduced her to the pastor. “I said, ‘Cody, thank you for bringing your girlfriend.’ And Sydney replied, ‘He didn’t bring me. I brought him.’ ” At some point, Cody also introduced Sydney to members of the Franklin family. One day, she got to meet Sloan Everett, the young Breckenridge rancher, and his wife, Liesl. Sloan and Liesl looked like the portrait of Texas ranch royalty. He was boyishly handsome, with sandy-colored hair, blue eyes, and an easy smile. Liesl was also blue-eyed and as elegant as a swan, her blond hair usually pulled back in a ponytail. They had two very young, blue-eyed children—a daughter named Scarlett Austin and a son named Samuel Sloan, who babbled cheerfully and loved being held. Sloan was raised in Breckenridge. He attended Baylor University, graduating in 2004 with a double major in finance and entrepreneurship. He spent a couple of years in Oklahoma working as an auditor for ConocoPhillips and then moved to Dallas to be a financial analyst for Hunt Oil. In 2009, he met Liesl, who was five years younger. She too was a Baylor graduate, a fashion merchandising major who had moved to Dallas to work for the online division of Neiman Marcus. Both Sloan and Liesl were devout Christians who unabashedly talked about God’s presence in their lives. At the start of their first date, in 2009, he spent a few minutes on the phone with two inner-city kids he mentored, arranging a time to pick them up for church. “When I got home that night, I called my parents and told them I had never met a guy with such character,” Liesl says. “He was different, genuinely kind and sincere. It was hard for me not to think about him.” Sloan and Leisl Everett at their wedding, in July 2011; Sloan and his daughter Scarlett. GRAY’S STUDIO; CAROLINE JURGENSEN As they continued to date, Sloan told her that despite his promising future in the oil business, what he really wanted to do was return to Breckenridge to work on his family’s ranches. He took Liesl to his small North Dallas apartment one night, brought out his guitar, and played her “My Rifle, My Pony and Me” from the 1959 John Wayne western Rio Bravo. He read to her from one of his favorite books, Ben Green’s memoir Horse Tradin’. One afternoon, Liesl pinned a photo of Sloan on the wall of her cubicle at Neiman’s. He was in his ranch garb, his hat pulled down over his eyes. “I looked at that photo over and over, and I thought, ‘I want to marry that man,’ ” she says. In July 2011, they did marry, at an outdoor ceremony on the Franklin, attended by more than two hundred friends and relatives. Liesl walked down the aisle to the theme song from the miniseries Lonesome Dove. After a Caribbean honeymoon, they moved into a three-bedroom home on one of the Everett ranches. Early in the mornings, Sloan would work cattle with the Everett cowboys, and in the late afternoons, he’d lift weights at the local gym or run on the high school track. At night, he’d drive to his parents’ house to talk with his father about ways to improve the ranches’ productivity and increase the size of the herds. And then he’d go home and work on his computer, putting the ranches’ business operations on QuickBooks or studying online reports about bulls that were for sale. ONE AFTERNOON, LIESL PINNED A PHOTO OF SLOAN ON THE WALL OF HER CUBICLE AT NEIMAN’S. HE WAS IN HIS RANCH GARB, HIS HAT PULLED DOWN OVER HIS EYES. “I LOOKED AT THAT PHOTO AND I THOUGHT, ‘I WANT TO MARRY THAT MAN,’ ” SHE SAYS. “Sloan was learning the cattle business from top to bottom,” says the elder Everett, who is 66. (Jim himself had left Breckenridge after high school to attend college and law school, and he had worked briefly as a prosecutor for the Dallas County district attorney’s office before returning to Breckenridge to take over the family’s cattle company.) “He was so smart and so thorough. There was no doubt in my mind that when the time came for me to retire, the ranches were going to be in very good hands.” In fact, Sloan was so conscientious about his job that he regularly drove to the Franklin just to check on that small herd of heifers that he had put on the west pasture. Liesl and the children usually came with him so they could spend time on the ranch and also see her parents in Amarillo. This past February, after Cody let him know that the heifers were starting to calve, Sloan talked to Liesl, who was three months pregnant with their third child, and they decided to travel with the kids to Amarillo on March 3. From there, Sloan planned to go with Liesl’s father and her brothers on a quick two-day ski trip to Taos. He told Liesl that when he got back, he wanted to swing by the Franklin. Maybe we can get there Sunday afternoon, March 5, Sloan said. Or Monday, March 6. Sounds good to me, Liesl said. THE PANHANDLE FAMILY TRADITION Video Player 00:0000:00 Urban Texans tend to think cowboying is a vanishing way of life. But in the Panhandle, cowboys still raise their children to become cowboys themselves. Here, Sy Brown, who works the Combs-Worley Ranch near the Franklin, takes his two young sons out to the pastures to learn the trade. After sending his March 1 email about the midlatitude cyclone, Todd Lindley, the National Weather Service meteorologist, could think about little else. He kept his eyes glued on his computer screens as the storm system, which was still 15,000 to 20,000 feet in the atmosphere, raced over the Pacific Coast. He talked extensively to Greg Murdoch, a National Weather Service senior forecaster who is based in Midland. They studied the movement of the cyclone’s “low-level thermal ridge,” and they double-checked the temperatures and relative humidity that were forecast for March 6. The day was definitely going to be hot and dry. Lindley sighed. The entire southern Great Plains was turning into a tinderbox. On March 4, the National Weather Service began issuing warnings to western Kansas, western Oklahoma, and the Texas Panhandle about the potential for wildfires. In Texas, officials with the Texas A&M Forest Service made sure their firefighting aircraft—single-engine air tankers that can drop six to eight hundred gallons of thick red fire retardant per flight—were completely fueled and ready to fly. The forest service officials also ordered nearly thirty of their best firefighters, some from as far away as East Texas, to travel to the Panhandle. Meanwhile, in the rural towns, members of the volunteer fire departments double-checked their “grass rigs,” customized one-ton trucks that carry four hundred gallons of water and can move quickly through off-road terrain. Early on the morning of March 6, as the midlatitude cyclone reached the Rocky Mountains, the winds began tumbling toward the ground, and they were indeed gusting up to 50 miles an hour—equivalent to the wind speed of a decent-sized tropical storm. Around 11:30 a.m., the winds reached the southern Great Plains. In Beaver County, Oklahoma, a power line started swinging in the wind. A shower of sparks fell to the ground and a spot fire sprang up, the size of a fist. Usually such a small fire stays “benign,” to use the parlance of wildfire specialists, and quickly dies out. But pushed by the wind, this fire kept growing, the flames wrapping around the wilted grass, and it was soon on the run, galloping eastward across an open range. Panhandle fire, March 6, 2017. Hoover Volunteer Fire Department Within an hour, there were reports of half a dozen more grass fires in Oklahoma and Kansas. Around 1:45 p.m., a couple of spot fires were seen three miles north of Amarillo, along U.S. 287. They were a mile and a half apart and most likely had been caused by sparks from a chain being dragged along the pavement by a truck or trailer. The two fires quickly merged and turned into one large fire. Brad Smith, a Texas A&M Forest Service wildfire analyst, drove to the scene. By the time he got there, the fire was at least three miles wide and the flames at the front were twenty feet high. It was moving at 6 to 7 miles per hour, as fast as Smith had ever seen a wildfire move on the Texas Plains. Around 2:30 p.m., there was a report of another Texas fire, this one near the town of Perryton, in the northeast corner of the Panhandle. John Erickson—a 73-year-old rancher who also writes the best-selling Hank the Cowdog children’s book series about a smelly but lovable cowdog that lives on a Panhandle ranch—drove his pickup to the top of a bluff to get a look at it. Over the years, Erickson had seen his share of prairie fires. In The Case of the Blazing Sky, his fifty-first Hank book (Erickson has published 69 of them since 1983), he has Hank tell his young readers, “I guess you know what strong wind does to a fire. In dry weather, it will turn a little fire into a roaring monster . . . a roaring, leaping, hissing monster.” That afternoon, standing on the bluff, Erickson realized a monster was on its way. He watched the fire triple in size. The smoke, he would later say, looked like a cloud from an atom bomb explosion. He drove back to his ranch house and told his wife, Kris, to pack some clothes in a suitcase. They needed to get out of there as soon as they could. Along with the Texas A&M Forest Service firefighters, at least a dozen Panhandle volunteer fire departments arrived to do battle with the fires near Amarillo and Perryton. The men and women stood on their grass rigs and shot streams of water at the sides of the fires to keep them from getting wider. Using road graders and bulldozers, they built firebreaks to slow the blazes’ forward momentum or divert the fires away from populated areas. SOURCES: Texas A&M Forest Service, National Weather Service MAP BY DARLA CAMERON But the two fires were relentless. They jumped over many of the firebreaks and hurtled across pasture after pasture—scorching hundreds of thousands of acres. The fires burned down barns, outbuildings, and ranch houses. (Erickson lost his house and his adjoining office, but he did escape with his Mac, which contained his most recent unpublished Hank stories.) They swept over bawling cattle and panicked horses. Pronghorn, racing away from the fires, ran straight into barbed-wire fences, decapitating themselves. In the town of Canadian, a young man named Cade Koch left his job at a hardware store and headed for his home in Lipscomb, 25 miles away, so that he could check on his wife, who they had just learned was pregnant. He tried to drive through a thick cloud of smoke that was coming from the Perryton fire, but the truck stalled. Cade, who was only 25 years old, suffocated from smoke inhalation. And then, about 3:45 that afternoon, a report came in of a third fire in Texas, this one in the southeastern part of the Panhandle, near the town of Lefors. It was headed due east, straight toward the Franklin Ranch, six miles away. As promised, Sydney had driven out to see Cody. And as always, she had brought along Dale, her dog. While riding through the north pastures with Cody, she had Snapchatted a photo of Dale sticking his head out the window of Cody’s pickup, looking at some yearlings. By 4 p.m., they were back at Cody’s house. They saw a plume of smoke in the distance. It looked as if a small plane might have crashed several miles away. At 4:06, Cody got a call from his father, Brock, who was at his ranch, standing outside by his barn. He too was looking at the smoke. Cody told his father that he was going to drive to the western side of the Franklin to see if a fire was threatening any of the ranch’s cattle. USUALLY SUCH A SMALL FIRE STAYS “BENIGN,” TO USE THE PARLANCE OF WILDFIRE SPECIALISTS. BUT PUSHED BY THE WIND, THIS FIRE KEPT GROWING, THE FLAMES WRAPPING AROUND THE WILTED GRASS, AND IT WAS SOON ON THE RUN. Cody saddled and trailered one of his favorite horses, Junior, a bay-colored gelding with a black mane and black tail. Meanwhile, Sydney hopped into the passenger seat of the pickup. If he tried to persuade her to stay behind, she was having none of it. (“She wasn’t one who was told, ‘You stay here,’ ” one of her friends would later say.) But she did one thing that was out of the ordinary: she left Dale behind in the house. Cody drove west for a couple of miles on one of the ranch’s dirt roads. When he and Sydney reached the west pasture, he came to a sudden stop and no doubt stared through the windshield in bewilderment—because there, standing in the pasture, was Sloan Everett. Earlier that afternoon, Sloan, Liesl, their children, and Liesl’s mother, Jane, had driven to the Franklin from Amarillo. They had arrived around 3 p.m., and by 4, they too were looking at the smoke on the horizon. Sloan had told Liesl that he was going to take a quick trip out to the west pasture to make sure his heifers and calves were not in the line of the fire. He had driven one of the ranch’s four-wheelers to the pasture. With his cellphone, he had taken a few photos of the smoke, which was still far away and looked to be only a couple of football fields in width. But by the time Cody and Sydney pulled into the west pasture, at around 4:30, conditions were quickly changing. The smoke was getting closer, and below the smoke was a visible line of fire. Sloan called Liesl and told her that she, her mother, and the kids needed to leave the ranch immediately. A photo of the March 6 fire on the Franklin Ranch taken by Sloan just minutes before he attempted to save his cattle. Sloan, however, wasn’t going anywhere. Neither was Cody. The young rancher and the young cowboy had devoted their lives to taking care of cattle, and they were not about to let those forty heifers and the newly born calves burn to death. “I’m not sure if city people will ever understand this,” says Magee, Cody’s boss. “But out here, you get up every morning and you think about what you need to do that’s best for your cows. That’s your responsibility. You look after cattle. You don’t think twice about it.” Sloan and Cody decided that the best way to save the heifers and calves was to move them to the south, so they’d be below the fire as it swept eastward. Cody unloaded Junior. He most likely told Sydney to drive the truck to a gate on the southern side of the west pasture and blow the truck’s horn. Most of the cattle, thinking they were about to be fed, would have followed the truck. Cody, who was on Junior, and Sloan, who was on the four-wheeler, trailed behind the herd, pushing along the heavily pregnant heifers that were moving more slowly. They must have constantly been looking over their shoulders, staring at the smoke, trying to track the fire’s progress. Sloan made another quick call to Liesl to make sure that they had left the ranch. (They had.) But the call went straight to Liesl’s voicemail. (Cell service on Panhandle ranches is notoriously spotty.) When Liesl later played back the message, she could hear Sloan calling to his heifers, making a yip yip yip sound. At the end of the message, she heard him say “Liesl?” And then the line went dead. The gate at the southern end of the west pasture led to the neighboring Gething Ranch. Sydney probably jumped out of the truck to open the gate, and the heifers trudged into an empty pasture, their big bodies swaying and their heads swinging. The calves, some of them only a week old, trotted next to their mothers. Sloan, Cody, and Sydney had to have felt a sense of relief—perhaps even jubilation. They could see the smoke was headed due east. They—and the cattle—were out of the line of fire. But at around 5:30, the wind inexplicably shifted, ever so slightly. Instead of blowing straight out of the west, it started coming from the northwest. Panhandle residents standing in their front yards would barely have noticed the change. But on the Gething Ranch, Sloan, Cody, and Sydney must have immediately sensed what was happening. The fire, now veering in a southeasterly direction, was moving straight toward them. Cody knew the Gething well. As a teenager, he’d done “day work” (what cowboys call part-time work) on the ranch. He knew its pastures were dotted with sand hills, which look somewhat like sand dunes next to a seashore, except that the hills are covered with grass and scrub brush. And the sand hills offered a chance of survival. If they could get on top of a hill, it was possible that the fire would stay in a draw, go around the hill, and miss them altogether. There is no way of knowing exactly what happened next. But here is one likely scenario. Cody and Sydney climbed onto Junior and headed up the closest hill, leaving the truck and trailer behind. Sloan was right behind them on his four-wheeler. Sydney wrapped her arms around Cody’s waist, hanging on for dear life. When Cody turned in his saddle, he could see the fire. It was writhing up the hill, spitting red sparks, with columns of throat-clogging smoke swirling in front of the flames. The burning twigs on the bushes crackled like gunfire. At some point, Sloan lost control of the four-wheeler and was thrown to the ground. (The four-wheeler was later found tangled in a barbed-wire fence.) Cody and Sydney also ended up on the ground. Either a terrified Junior bucked them off his back, or the horse stumbled in the sand, fell to his knees, and rolled. Sloan, Cody, and Sydney did the only thing they could do: they ran. Soon, smoke enveloped them like a gray-black curtain, shutting out the world. They couldn’t see or breathe. Disoriented, they ran in different directions, gasping for air, pumping their legs through the sand as fast as they could. They didn’t get far. Within seconds, the flames were on top of them. The fire kept pushing eastward until the volunteer fire departments and the forest service eventually got it under control. On a bluff above the Franklin, several cowboys gathered. Joe Magee, his son Destry, and Cody’s father, Brock, were also there. Because Cody hadn’t returned their texts or calls for the past couple of hours, they knew something was wrong. They hooked their thumbs over their belts and squinted toward the distant burned-out pastures. They didn’t say much. One of Magee’s cowboys, 37-year-old Sy Brown, pulled up in his truck. When he’s not working on a Magee ranch, Brown serves as the volunteer fire chief for the town of Lefors, not far from where the fire had started. Brown told the other men that he had just driven past the ranch headquarters, which the fire had skirted (partly because the lawns around the homes and the outbuildings were well watered, freshly mowed, and contained no dry grass). He also had driven through the west pasture and through some of the northern pastures, but he hadn’t spotted Cody, Sydney, or Sloan. “I don’t know,” Brown said quietly. “Maybe they went south, to the Gething.” Evening was coming on. The sun was dropping behind the horizon. Joe, Destry, and Brock piled into a truck and drove the fence line between the Franklin and the Gething. Huddled against a corner fence was Junior. His hair was burned down to the skin and his saddle blanket was smoldering. He was in such pain he couldn’t look up. Brock got out of the truck and jerked the saddle and saddle blanket off the horse. Joe leaned against the pickup and looked at Brock. “We’ve got a wreck on our hands,” he said. A few of the cowboys spread out in a single line, thirty or forty yards apart, and they started walking through the Gething pasture, using the flashlights on their cellphones to guide their way. The ground was still warm from the fire, the heat seeping up through their boots, but they kept walking. Every few yards or so, they’d do an old-fashioned “brush call”: shouting “woo-woo” to one another so that they knew they were maintaining a straight line. (When working brushy pastures, looking for stray cattle, cowboys on horseback have long used the same call.) As they ascended one of the sand hills, they heard a feeble cry. “Hey.” It was Cody. Brock and the others ran up the sand hill. Sydney was on the ground, curled up like a kitten, lifeless. Forty yards away, on his back, was Cody. His clothes had been burned off. The only things remaining on his body were his leather Western belt, his Bustamante boots, and the spurs he’d gotten his senior year of high school. “Dad, I’m sorry,” Cody said. “I’m sorry.” “Son, you did nothing wrong,” Brock replied, cradling Cody’s head in his arms. Cody’s skin was almost black from his burns, his hair gone. He told his father he was cold. Brock stripped off his shirt and wrapped it around his son. “I’ve come a long way, Dad,” said Cody, who seemed to be getting delirious. “I know, honey,” Brock said. He then called Kristie and said, “You need to get on out here. It’s bad.” Fifty yards away, one of the other cowboys, 32-year-old Derek Kincannon, found Sloan. He too was naked except for his boots and belt. “Sir, please help me,” Sloan whispered. Kincannon had no idea what to do. He finally held Sloan’s hand and said, “You just keep breathing. Help is on its way.” By then, Liesl had returned with her mother and the children to their ranch house. Someone called and let them know that Sloan and Cody had been found alive and that medical helicopters were on their way to the Gething to transport the men to a hospital in Amarillo. More cowboys and volunteer firefighters got to the sand hill in their pickups and grass rigs. They formed a circle with the trucks and turned on their brights so the helicopters would know where to land. When the first helicopter touched down, a paramedic ran over to Sloan. He took one look at him and began reciting the 23rd Psalm. Sloan moved his lips. The paramedic thought he was trying to recite the psalm along with him. By the time the second helicopter arrived, Kristie and Cody’s two brothers, Clay and Ben, were at his side. Paramedics lifted Cody onto a backboard. “Thank y’all for coming,” Cody said to the paramedics just before they sedated him. Sloan died before he got to the hospital. Cody died minutes after he was wheeled into the emergency room. Back at the Gething, a justice of the peace arrived to examine Sydney’s body and officially pronounce her cause of death. She was wrapped in a sheet, placed in the backseat of a pickup, and driven to a funeral home in the nearby town of Pampa. Meanwhile, one of Magee’s cowboys went looking for Junior. He shot the horse in the head, putting him out of his misery. Everyone prepared to go home. In the darkness, some heifers and calves began ambling from the Gething to the open gate that led to the west pasture. It was Sloan’s herd. Incredibly, except for three calves, all of them had escaped the fire—apparently, they had kept moving south away from the flames—and now they were returning to the pasture that they knew best. Against all odds, Cody, Sydney, and Sloan had saved the cattle. Video Player 00:0000:00 The next morning was chilly but beautiful. The wind was gone, and the skies clear except for a few lingering wisps of smoke. As friends gathered at the Crockett home, Brock went off to feed cattle and patch some fence at his ranch. “That’s what you do out here,” he says. “You get up and do your job.” When he got home that afternoon, he opened a hospital bag and pulled out Cody’s belt, boots, and spurs. He set them on the floor next to his own bed. All that Liesl got back was Sloan’s cellphone, which, incredibly, was still working (he had carried it in a waterproof and fireproof phone case), and his wedding ring, which had soot on it. Sydney’s mother, Lisa, received Sydney’s Apple Watch and a pair of earrings. Two days after the fire, Lisa drove up to the Panhandle with her husband. Along with Sydney’s father, Stephen Wallace, and his wife, they went to the Gething pasture with Brock and Kristie. At the spot where Sydney had been found, Lisa and Stephen scooped some sand into bottles. “Sometimes I ask myself, ‘How could this have happened?’ ” Lisa says. “Three wonderful young people, taken away by a wild fire. How could such a thing have happened?” I'M NOT SURE IF CITY PEOPLE WILL EVER UNDERSTAND THIS. BUT OUT HERE, YOU GET UP EVERY MORNING AND THINK ABOUT WHAT YOU NEED TO DO FOR YOUR COWS. THAT'S YOUR RESPONSIBILITY. YOU LOOK AFTER CATTLE. YOU DON'T THINK TWICE ABOUT IT. Lisa brought Dale back to her home. At a Methodist church in Round Rock, north of Austin, where Sydney had been baptized as a baby, close to 400 mourners attended her funeral. Propped on top of the casket was a photo of Sydney and Cody. During Sloan’s funeral at Breckenridge’s First Baptist Church, which was attended by more than 750 mourners, a video was played of Sloan singing “My Rifle, My Pony and Me.” In their eulogies, his friends described him as the finest man they had ever met. His father, Jim, spoke last. “I know the Lord was there with him in that fire,” he said, “and I know that He protected him from the pain, and that He was waiting there to take him with Him into indescribable joy.” For several seconds, there was silence as Jim tried not to sob. At the One Way Church in McLean (the biggest church in town), more than a thousand people showed up for Cody’s funeral, the crowd so large that it spilled onto the street. The fourteen pallbearers—his two brothers and twelve of his cowboy friends, young men with names such as Cutter and Kaleton—wore their best cowboy boots, starched jeans, starched white button-down shirts adorned with a single carnation, and their cowboy hats. In his message, Pastor Haynes told the crowd, “Cody was doing what he loved to do. . . . A better cowboy you cannot find.” At the end of the service, the saddle that had been on Junior the night of the fire was placed on top of Cody’s casket. There was a procession to the city cemetery, and Cody and his saddle were buried next to the graves of his great-grandparents. The tragedy reverberated through America’s rural communities. On Facebook pages and websites devoted to farming and ranching, there were countless postings about Sloan’s, Cody’s, and Sydney’s deaths. (“Only the good die young,” someone wrote. “Maybe God needed them to help with ‘the cattle on a thousand hills,’ ” wrote someone else, quoting from the Book of Psalms.) Amy Dean, a grandmother from Colorado, wrote and recorded “Cowboys With Wings,” a song memorializing Sloan, Cody, and Sydney. It was the first song she’d ever released. An Amarillo Christian rock musician, Matt Dietz, recorded a tribute song that he titled “Amarillo Burned.” People who had never met Sloan, Cody, or Sydney mailed cards and letters to their families. Cowboys from as far away as Waco showed up at the Crockett ranch and asked Brock if he needed any help. Throughout the southern Great Plains, families who were affected by the fires were overwhelmed with donations, receiving everything from bales of hay to covered-dish suppers. Teenagers who belonged to 4-H clubs and Future Farmers of America chapters helped with the cleanup. “Some girls from Oklahoma State who were on spring break showed up and asked if they could clean ranch houses,” Magee says. He pauses and shakes his head. “There’s a lot of love among ranching people. But Lord, it can be a tough business. Lord, it can be tough.” Crosses mark where Cody, Sydney, and Sloan were found on the Gething Ranch. Alice Franklin On that single March afternoon, at least 32 fires broke out in the southern Great Plains, scorching more than 1.2 million acres, “the largest individual Plains fire outbreak documented in the modern era,” says Lindley, the National Weather Service meteorologist. The amount of damage totaled tens of millions of dollars. Scattered throughout the pastures were at least a couple of thousand dead cows. Other cows and calves were burned so badly—“staggering around like broken toys,” wrote one reporter—that they were shot and carried by bulldozers to large pits for burial. Besides the deaths in Texas, a 63-year-old Oklahoma woman suffered a fatal heart attack as she and her husband tried to put out a fire that threatened their farm. In Kansas, a trucker suffocated when his semi jackknifed on a highway that was blanketed with smoke. Ironically, in mid-March, bountiful showers passed over the Panhandle, and by the first of May, carpets of new grass were already sprouting up in the blackened pastures. At the Franklin Ranch, Liesl’s family hosted a steak dinner to honor the cowboys, the volunteer firefighters, and the paramedics who had been at their ranch and at the Gething during the blaze. Everyone tried to make small talk around the tables. A couple of the cowboys began to say how much they were going to miss Sloan, Cody, and Sydney, but they got choked up. Before the dinner ended, at about 9 p.m.—the cowboys had to get home to bed to be ready for work the next morning—someone asked Liesl about her new baby, due in August. Liesl said she was having a boy. What are you going to name him? someone else asked. Well, Liesl said, since Samuel Sloan is already named after his daddy, she wanted to name the baby after a young man she knew who was never going to have kids. A young man whom she deeply admired, she said, who during his life had been earnest and kind and courageous. A young man who deserved some sort of legacy. There was a silence. “I’m going to call my baby Cody,” she said. Copyright © Texas Monthly 2017. All rights reserved. MENU THE DAY THE FIRE CAME   A tale of love and loss on the Panhandle plains. JULY 2017 | by SKIP HOLLANDSWORTH VIDEOS BY JOHN CARRITHERS Video Player On the morning of March 1, Todd Lindley, a forty-year-old science and operations officer with the National Weather Service, walked into his office in Norman, Oklahoma, and sat down in front of his four computer screens. Lindley specializes in weather on the southern Great Plains, a mostly flat five-hundred-mile expanse that runs from Kansas to just below the Panhandle of Texas. That morning, on one of the screens, he noticed a storm system that meteorologists call a “midlatitude cyclone,” a pinwheel of clouds spinning counterclockwise over the open waters of the Pacific, two thousand miles away. Lindley wheeled his chair closer to that screen and typed a few commands on the keyboard. The computer projected that the midlatitude cyclone would reach the northwestern coastline of the United States by March 3, head toward the Rocky Mountains, and swoop down on to the southern Great Plains on March 6, bringing with it wind gusts of at least 50 miles an hour. Lindley stared at his screen for several seconds. Then he murmured a single word. “Fire.” For the past couple of months, Lindley had been worried about the possibility of a prairie fire sweeping across the southern Great Plains. After enduring several years of drought, the entire area had received a large amount of rain during the spring and summer of 2016, which in turn had produced an immensity of grass, three to four feet high in some pastures. Now, in these final days of winter, that grass was dormant and dry as hay. All that was needed to set that grass ablaze was a few sparks from an untended campfire, a passing train engine, a malfunctioning power line, or a cigarette butt thrown out a car window. On an especially windy day, that fire could spiral out of control within minutes. I GUESS YOU KNOW WHAT A STRONG WIND DOES TO A FIRE. IN DRY WEATHER, IT WILL TURN A LITTLE FIRE INTO A ROARING MONSTER...A ROARING, LEAPING, HISSING MONSTER. Already in January and February, the Panhandle had seen several small fires. In Amarillo, a utility pole had snapped and set off a fire behind a Toot’n Totum that burned an acre of grassland. In nearby Pampa, a grass fire had closed two highways for an afternoon, and another grass fire had advanced toward the town of Tulia, prompting the evacuation of a neighborhood before it was put out. But Lindley sensed that March 6 was going to be different. Besides the high winds, temperatures were expected to soar to 80 degrees that day, about 20 degrees above normal, and the relative humidity was supposed to drop into the single digits. With such hot, dry, and windy conditions, Lindley suspected the southern Plains might get not just one fire. It could get multiple fires, a phenomenon known as a firestorm. The only question was where those fires would hit. Lindley quickly sent an email to other National Weather Service meteorologists, state forestry officials, and fire chiefs who work western Kansas, western Oklahoma, and the Texas Panhandle, notifying them of the computer projections. “Current solutions highlight the ejection of a shortwave trough and a highly amplified thermal ridge near the 100th meridian,” he wrote. “Appears to be worthy of an early heads up!” One of Lindley’s co-workers walked into his office and asked if he really was convinced a fire was coming. Lindley just nodded his head. It could be a long day, he said. A very, very long day. As Lindley was sending his email, Cody Crockett, a twenty-year-old cowboy, was at work on the nine-thousand-acre Franklin Ranch, seventy or so miles northeast of Amarillo. The Franklin is one of the more famous ranches in the eastern Panhandle. Purchased in 1936 by Oliver Morris Franklin, the inventor of the vaccine for blackleg, a virulent disease that kills cattle, the ranch is now owned by three of his granddaughters (two of whom live in Amarillo, the other in Pampa), who tend to bring their families to visit on weekends and for vacations. The Franklin is a beautiful spread, its main house and guest house nestled in a tree-lined draw, near a pond and a gurgling creek. There’s a swimming pool and a tennis court. Throughout the ranch, wildlife abounds: white-tailed deer, roadrunners, quail, doves, and wild turkey. In the distance, cattle quietly graze on pastures that stretch out like a vast sea. Cody was as lean as a sapling, six-feet-one and 185 pounds. He lived in a two-bedroom foreman’s house about a half mile from the ranch headquarters. He was almost always up and dressed by sunrise. He’d down a bowl of cereal—he preferred an off-brand version of Lucky Charms—walk outside to feed the ranch’s horses, and then saddle one of the horses, load him into a trailer hooked to a flatbed pickup truck, and head for the pastures. That morning, Cody drove to the Franklin’s north pastures so he could check on eight hundred steers that had been shipped to the ranch a couple of weeks earlier. Each of the steers weighed around 450 pounds, and Cody’s job was to have them fattened up to at least 750 pounds by October, when they would be shipped to a feed yard and then on to the slaughterhouse. He drove slowly through the pastures, blowing the truck’s horn to get the steers’ attention. Attached to the bed of his pickup was a large metal feeder that dumped pellets of high-protein cow cake on the ground for the steers to eat. At some point that morning he untrailered his horse and went “prowling,” as cowboys like to say. Whenever he saw a steer with its head down or ears drooping—signs of illness—he grabbed his long rope, made a loop, swung it into the air, fired it around the steer’s neck, dismounted, grabbed a medicine kit from his saddle bag, injected the steer with an antibiotic, and within minutes was back on his horse, prowling some more. Cody Crockett roping calves; Cody in July 2016. ALICE FRANKLIN; ERIN CRISTA SMITH Cody checked the windmills and water tanks. He examined the fences to see if any of them needed patching. He then drove over to the west pasture, where he dumped more cake on the ground for forty Angus heifers. The heifers belonged to Sloan Everett, the 35-year-old husband of Liesl Austin Everett, a daughter of one of the Franklin’s owners. Sloan himself came from a prominent ranching family. His father, Jim Everett, runs the Everett Cattle Company, which owns four ranches, totaling nearly 19,000 acres, just outside the West Texas town of Breckenridge, about a four-hour drive south of the Franklin. Sloan helped his father manage the ranches, and by all accounts, he was a smart cowman. In October 2015, when the pastures in the Breckenridge area were turning bare from drought, he had received the Franklin family’s permission to ship some heifers to the west pasture, which had better grass at the time, and have them bred with bulls. Now the heifers were healthy and calving. Prowling through the herd that morning, Cody was especially attentive. Sloan had recently told Cody that he would soon be driving up to the Franklin to get a look at his livestock, and the last thing Cody wanted Sloan to see was a sluggish heifer or a sick baby calf barely able to stand. AT THAT MOMENT, IT WAS SIMPLY IMPOSSIBLE TO IMAGINE THAT SOMETHING AWFUL WAS ALREADY HEADED THE FRANKLIN'S WAY. Cody took a break. As he did every day, he called or texted his girlfriend, Sydney Wallace, who worked in Amarillo as a nurse in the emergency room of Baptist St. Anthony’s Hospital. Sydney was 23, slim and blond—her friends said she looked like Taylor Swift. Whenever she had a couple of days off, she loved visiting the Franklin to be with Cody, always bringing along her little white Maltese dog, Dale. In fact, Sydney was planning to drive to the Franklin later that week, and Cody couldn’t wait to see her. He had told his mother, Kristie, that he and Sydney had been talking about marriage—not soon, but someday. They had even Googled photos of wedding rings on his phone. “There’s no one like her,” Cody liked to say. “No one like my Syd.” That afternoon, Cody worked more cattle. It was a glorious day on the Franklin, the temperatures mild and the wind a whispery breeze. Clouds drifted across the sky and birds turned circles in the air. As the day came to an end, the sun set slowly over the pastures, its reddish-violet hue spreading across the sky. At that moment, it was simply impossible to imagine that something awful was already headed the Franklin’s way. Everyone who knew Cody said he was born to be a cowboy. Both of his grandfathers worked as cowboys on ranches in the eastern Panhandle, and his 52-year-old father, Brock, is also a lifelong cowboy who began working on Panhandle ranches when he was a young teenager. Brock and Kristie had raised Cody and his three siblings—his brothers, Clay and Ben, and his sister, Callie—on a small ranch just outside the dusty town of McLean (population 775), about twenty miles from the Franklin Ranch. All the Crockett children took to the cowboy life, but Cody was consumed with it. At the age of two, he was riding one of his father’s old quarter horses, and at three, he was roping dummies with a piggin’ string. When he was in elementary school, he was tagging along with Brock to spring brandings, where he roped calves and dragged them to the fire. “Even back then, Cody was throwing a good, flat loop, which isn’t easy to do,” says Brock, a stocky man who used to ride broncos in amateur rodeos. “Other cowboys would tell me that he was on his way to making a good hand. Out here, for a little boy, that’s as good a compliment as you can get.” On Saturdays, Cody would lie on the floor in the living room, drink Dr Peppers with one of his buddies, and talk about the big ranches, like the Four Sixes, that he planned to work on one day. When older cowboys came over to the house to talk, he’d sit right beside them, his elbows on his knees. “You could almost see him making mental notes as they talked about what ropes they used or which trucks they liked,” says Kristie, who teaches second grade at the McLean public school. “My daddy [Bobby Thompson, who for many years was one of the cowboys on the Four Sixes,] once told him, ‘Cody, there’s a difference between working cattle and disturbing cattle.’ Cody used to repeat that line every chance he got.” AT HIS GRADUATION CEREMONY, IN MAY 2015, CODY LEFT HIS DIPLOMA WEDGED BETWEEN TWO CHAIRS AND WAS AT THE RANCH EARLY THE NEXT MORNING. During his high school years, his classmates named him Most Handsome and Best Dressed, even though he wore the same thing to school every day: a Western snap-button shirt, a Western belt, ironed blue jeans, boots from Amarillo’s Bustamante Cowboy Boots, and, of course, his cowboy hat. He was the star running back on the McLean Tigers’ six-man football team, good enough to play in junior college, people said. But cowboying was already his life. Sitting in a classroom, he’d get on his phone and buy hay for a local man who paid him to look after a small herd of cattle. In the late afternoons, no matter how long football practice lasted, he would break horses in a small arena next to his house. When his senior year came around, his parents asked him if he wanted a senior class ring. No, Cody said, he’d prefer a new pair of spurs. “He wore those spurs everywhere,” Kristie says. “It was a nice sound, listening to those rowels click against the floor.” It was also during Cody’s senior year that a man named Joe Magee paid him a visit. The 69-year-old Magee is a longtime Panhandle cowman, his face as wrinkled as an old saddle. He makes leasing arrangements with the owners of ranches, including the Franklin, to run his cattle on their pastures. Magee had known the Crockett family for many years, and whenever he saw Cody at work, he’d let out a whistle. “Roping, herding, sorting, breaking colts—there wasn’t anything he couldn’t do,” Magee says. “And he was a ‘yes, sir–no, sir’ kind of young man, respectful to everyone, as honest as the day is long. I knew that I needed to hire him, because if I didn’t, someone else would.” Magee told Cody he wanted him to be his full-time cowboy on the Franklin as soon as Cody graduated from high school. Cody was ecstatic. At his graduation ceremony, in May 2015, he left his diploma wedged between two chairs and was at the ranch early the next morning, working cattle. Magee paid him around $2,500 a month and also gave him a “beef”—a side of butchered, frozen beef for him to eat. (There’s a long tradition in the Panhandle that cowboys who work full-time on a ranch receive a beef each year from their employers.) Considering that Cody worked seven days a week, he wasn’t exactly getting rich. He also had to pay for his own health insurance to cover any on-the-job injuries, like “horse wrecks” (when a horse falls on a cowboy). But he wasn’t complaining. “He was one of the hardest-working cowboys we had,” says Magee’s son Destry, who helps oversee his father’s business. “If we had told him to dig a hole to China, he’d have said ‘Yes, sir’ and gone running after a shovel, and he’d have had a smile on his face the whole time.” In September 2015, when Cody was suffering from intense headaches and a high fever, his mother drove him to the emergency room at Baptist St. Anthony’s. Sydney Wallace walked up to his bed and said, “Hi, I’m your nurse.” Cody immediately flexed his biceps, hoping to impress her. Another nurse later slipped him Sydney’s number. When he called, Sydney said she’d let him take her hiking in the Palo Duro Canyon, but she wouldn’t go to dinner or to a movie until she got to know him better. “I laughed,” Kristie says. “I realized right then that Cody had met his match.” Cody Crockett and Sydney Wallace, in July 2016. Erin Crista Smith Sydney had grown up around Austin, spent her high school years in Monahans, a small town near Odessa, and then enrolled at West Texas A&M University in Canyon to study nursing. “She loved the pace and excitement of the emergency room,” says her mother, Lisa Sanchez. “She used to tell me that she wanted to move to Dallas to work in the trauma center at Parkland Hospital. And I’m sure she would have done it. But then she met Cody.” On that first date, after their hike through the canyon, Sydney did let Cody take her to dinner, at Bracero’s, her favorite Mexican restaurant in Amarillo. The next day, he brought her to McLean to watch his little brother Ben play in a junior high football game. Within a week, they were an item. On nights she worked, he’d show up at the hospital with Taco Bell. On one of his trips to Amarillo, he stopped at a boutique called the English Rose and bought her some Kendra Scott jewelry. Sydney, in turn, bought him Cinch Western shirts and a pair of tennis shoes, which he’d never buy for himself, so he’d have something to put on at the end of the day when his feet hurt from wearing boots. As she realized she was falling in love, Sydney traded in her small Kia Rio and bought a Chevy Traverse SUV, so she could better navigate the rutted dirt roads that led to the Franklin. At the ranch, Cody took her on horseback rides. They went swimming in the pool at the ranch headquarters. Sydney and her dog, Dale, often rode with Cody in the pickup to feed cattle. (She liked to jump out of the truck to open and shut the gates that led from one pasture to another.) One day, she went with him to a spring branding, where she castrated several bulls. At night, they often drove into McLean to have supper with Cody’s family. (Some rural Texans still call lunch “dinner” and the evening meal “supper.”) Or they went to the Red River Steakhouse, where she would order a steak kebab and he would order a jalapeño bacon cheeseburger. One night they visited the dance hall in McLean—which the locals jokingly refer to as the McLean Country Club—and they two-stepped around the floor. “What we loved about Sydney was that she just took to our way of life,” says Thacker Haynes, the pastor of the McLean United Methodist Church, who also owns a small ranch outside of town. “And, boy, did she have spunk.” One Sunday morning, Cody and Sydney came to church. As they were walking in, he introduced her to the pastor. “I said, ‘Cody, thank you for bringing your girlfriend.’ And Sydney replied, ‘He didn’t bring me. I brought him.’ ” At some point, Cody also introduced Sydney to members of the Franklin family. One day, she got to meet Sloan Everett, the young Breckenridge rancher, and his wife, Liesl. Sloan and Liesl looked like the portrait of Texas ranch royalty. He was boyishly handsome, with sandy-colored hair, blue eyes, and an easy smile. Liesl was also blue-eyed and as elegant as a swan, her blond hair usually pulled back in a ponytail. They had two very young, blue-eyed children—a daughter named Scarlett Austin and a son named Samuel Sloan, who babbled cheerfully and loved being held. Sloan was raised in Breckenridge. He attended Baylor University, graduating in 2004 with a double major in finance and entrepreneurship. He spent a couple of years in Oklahoma working as an auditor for ConocoPhillips and then moved to Dallas to be a financial analyst for Hunt Oil. In 2009, he met Liesl, who was five years younger. She too was a Baylor graduate, a fashion merchandising major who had moved to Dallas to work for the online division of Neiman Marcus. Both Sloan and Liesl were devout Christians who unabashedly talked about God’s presence in their lives. At the start of their first date, in 2009, he spent a few minutes on the phone with two inner-city kids he mentored, arranging a time to pick them up for church. “When I got home that night, I called my parents and told them I had never met a guy with such character,” Liesl says. “He was different, genuinely kind and sincere. It was hard for me not to think about him.” Sloan and Leisl Everett at their wedding, in July 2011; Sloan and his daughter Scarlett. GRAY’S STUDIO; CAROLINE JURGENSEN As they continued to date, Sloan told her that despite his promising future in the oil business, what he really wanted to do was return to Breckenridge to work on his family’s ranches. He took Liesl to his small North Dallas apartment one night, brought out his guitar, and played her “My Rifle, My Pony and Me” from the 1959 John Wayne western Rio Bravo. He read to her from one of his favorite books, Ben Green’s memoir Horse Tradin’. One afternoon, Liesl pinned a photo of Sloan on the wall of her cubicle at Neiman’s. He was in his ranch garb, his hat pulled down over his eyes. “I looked at that photo over and over, and I thought, ‘I want to marry that man,’ ” she says. In July 2011, they did marry, at an outdoor ceremony on the Franklin, attended by more than two hundred friends and relatives. Liesl walked down the aisle to the theme song from the miniseries Lonesome Dove. After a Caribbean honeymoon, they moved into a three-bedroom home on one of the Everett ranches. Early in the mornings, Sloan would work cattle with the Everett cowboys, and in the late afternoons, he’d lift weights at the local gym or run on the high school track. At night, he’d drive to his parents’ house to talk with his father about ways to improve the ranches’ productivity and increase the size of the herds. And then he’d go home and work on his computer, putting the ranches’ business operations on QuickBooks or studying online reports about bulls that were for sale. ONE AFTERNOON, LIESL PINNED A PHOTO OF SLOAN ON THE WALL OF HER CUBICLE AT NEIMAN’S. HE WAS IN HIS RANCH GARB, HIS HAT PULLED DOWN OVER HIS EYES. “I LOOKED AT THAT PHOTO AND I THOUGHT, ‘I WANT TO MARRY THAT MAN,’ ” SHE SAYS. “Sloan was learning the cattle business from top to bottom,” says the elder Everett, who is 66. (Jim himself had left Breckenridge after high school to attend college and law school, and he had worked briefly as a prosecutor for the Dallas County district attorney’s office before returning to Breckenridge to take over the family’s cattle company.) “He was so smart and so thorough. There was no doubt in my mind that when the time came for me to retire, the ranches were going to be in very good hands.” In fact, Sloan was so conscientious about his job that he regularly drove to the Franklin just to check on that small herd of heifers that he had put on the west pasture. Liesl and the children usually came with him so they could spend time on the ranch and also see her parents in Amarillo. This past February, after Cody let him know that the heifers were starting to calve, Sloan talked to Liesl, who was three months pregnant with their third child, and they decided to travel with the kids to Amarillo on March 3. From there, Sloan planned to go with Liesl’s father and her brothers on a quick two-day ski trip to Taos. He told Liesl that when he got back, he wanted to swing by the Franklin. Maybe we can get there Sunday afternoon, March 5, Sloan said. Or Monday, March 6. Sounds good to me, Liesl said. THE PANHANDLE FAMILY TRADITION Video Player 00:0000:00 Urban Texans tend to think cowboying is a vanishing way of life. But in the Panhandle, cowboys still raise their children to become cowboys themselves. Here, Sy Brown, who works the Combs-Worley Ranch near the Franklin, takes his two young sons out to the pastures to learn the trade. After sending his March 1 email about the midlatitude cyclone, Todd Lindley, the National Weather Service meteorologist, could think about little else. He kept his eyes glued on his computer screens as the storm system, which was still 15,000 to 20,000 feet in the atmosphere, raced over the Pacific Coast. He talked extensively to Greg Murdoch, a National Weather Service senior forecaster who is based in Midland. They studied the movement of the cyclone’s “low-level thermal ridge,” and they double-checked the temperatures and relative humidity that were forecast for March 6. The day was definitely going to be hot and dry. Lindley sighed. The entire southern Great Plains was turning into a tinderbox. On March 4, the National Weather Service began issuing warnings to western Kansas, western Oklahoma, and the Texas Panhandle about the potential for wildfires. In Texas, officials with the Texas A&M Forest Service made sure their firefighting aircraft—single-engine air tankers that can drop six to eight hundred gallons of thick red fire retardant per flight—were completely fueled and ready to fly. The forest service officials also ordered nearly thirty of their best firefighters, some from as far away as East Texas, to travel to the Panhandle. Meanwhile, in the rural towns, members of the volunteer fire departments double-checked their “grass rigs,” customized one-ton trucks that carry four hundred gallons of water and can move quickly through off-road terrain. Early on the morning of March 6, as the midlatitude cyclone reached the Rocky Mountains, the winds began tumbling toward the ground, and they were indeed gusting up to 50 miles an hour—equivalent to the wind speed of a decent-sized tropical storm. Around 11:30 a.m., the winds reached the southern Great Plains. In Beaver County, Oklahoma, a power line started swinging in the wind. A shower of sparks fell to the ground and a spot fire sprang up, the size of a fist. Usually such a small fire stays “benign,” to use the parlance of wildfire specialists, and quickly dies out. But pushed by the wind, this fire kept growing, the flames wrapping around the wilted grass, and it was soon on the run, galloping eastward across an open range. Panhandle fire, March 6, 2017. Hoover Volunteer Fire Department Within an hour, there were reports of half a dozen more grass fires in Oklahoma and Kansas. Around 1:45 p.m., a couple of spot fires were seen three miles north of Amarillo, along U.S. 287. They were a mile and a half apart and most likely had been caused by sparks from a chain being dragged along the pavement by a truck or trailer. The two fires quickly merged and turned into one large fire. Brad Smith, a Texas A&M Forest Service wildfire analyst, drove to the scene. By the time he got there, the fire was at least three miles wide and the flames at the front were twenty feet high. It was moving at 6 to 7 miles per hour, as fast as Smith had ever seen a wildfire move on the Texas Plains. Around 2:30 p.m., there was a report of another Texas fire, this one near the town of Perryton, in the northeast corner of the Panhandle. John Erickson—a 73-year-old rancher who also writes the best-selling Hank the Cowdog children’s book series about a smelly but lovable cowdog that lives on a Panhandle ranch—drove his pickup to the top of a bluff to get a look at it. Over the years, Erickson had seen his share of prairie fires. In The Case of the Blazing Sky, his fifty-first Hank book (Erickson has published 69 of them since 1983), he has Hank tell his young readers, “I guess you know what strong wind does to a fire. In dry weather, it will turn a little fire into a roaring monster . . . a roaring, leaping, hissing monster.” That afternoon, standing on the bluff, Erickson realized a monster was on its way. He watched the fire triple in size. The smoke, he would later say, looked like a cloud from an atom bomb explosion. He drove back to his ranch house and told his wife, Kris, to pack some clothes in a suitcase. They needed to get out of there as soon as they could. Along with the Texas A&M Forest Service firefighters, at least a dozen Panhandle volunteer fire departments arrived to do battle with the fires near Amarillo and Perryton. The men and women stood on their grass rigs and shot streams of water at the sides of the fires to keep them from getting wider. Using road graders and bulldozers, they built firebreaks to slow the blazes’ forward momentum or divert the fires away from populated areas. SOURCES: Texas A&M Forest Service, National Weather Service MAP BY DARLA CAMERON But the two fires were relentless. They jumped over many of the firebreaks and hurtled across pasture after pasture—scorching hundreds of thousands of acres. The fires burned down barns, outbuildings, and ranch houses. (Erickson lost his house and his adjoining office, but he did escape with his Mac, which contained his most recent unpublished Hank stories.) They swept over bawling cattle and panicked horses. Pronghorn, racing away from the fires, ran straight into barbed-wire fences, decapitating themselves. In the town of Canadian, a young man named Cade Koch left his job at a hardware store and headed for his home in Lipscomb, 25 miles away, so that he could check on his wife, who they had just learned was pregnant. He tried to drive through a thick cloud of smoke that was coming from the Perryton fire, but the truck stalled. Cade, who was only 25 years old, suffocated from smoke inhalation. And then, about 3:45 that afternoon, a report came in of a third fire in Texas, this one in the southeastern part of the Panhandle, near the town of Lefors. It was headed due east, straight toward the Franklin Ranch, six miles away. As promised, Sydney had driven out to see Cody. And as always, she had brought along Dale, her dog. While riding through the north pastures with Cody, she had Snapchatted a photo of Dale sticking his head out the window of Cody’s pickup, looking at some yearlings. By 4 p.m., they were back at Cody’s house. They saw a plume of smoke in the distance. It looked as if a small plane might have crashed several miles away. At 4:06, Cody got a call from his father, Brock, who was at his ranch, standing outside by his barn. He too was looking at the smoke. Cody told his father that he was going to drive to the western side of the Franklin to see if a fire was threatening any of the ranch’s cattle. USUALLY SUCH A SMALL FIRE STAYS “BENIGN,” TO USE THE PARLANCE OF WILDFIRE SPECIALISTS. BUT PUSHED BY THE WIND, THIS FIRE KEPT GROWING, THE FLAMES WRAPPING AROUND THE WILTED GRASS, AND IT WAS SOON ON THE RUN. Cody saddled and trailered one of his favorite horses, Junior, a bay-colored gelding with a black mane and black tail. Meanwhile, Sydney hopped into the passenger seat of the pickup. If he tried to persuade her to stay behind, she was having none of it. (“She wasn’t one who was told, ‘You stay here,’ ” one of her friends would later say.) But she did one thing that was out of the ordinary: she left Dale behind in the house. Cody drove west for a couple of miles on one of the ranch’s dirt roads. When he and Sydney reached the west pasture, he came to a sudden stop and no doubt stared through the windshield in bewilderment—because there, standing in the pasture, was Sloan Everett. Earlier that afternoon, Sloan, Liesl, their children, and Liesl’s mother, Jane, had driven to the Franklin from Amarillo. They had arrived around 3 p.m., and by 4, they too were looking at the smoke on the horizon. Sloan had told Liesl that he was going to take a quick trip out to the west pasture to make sure his heifers and calves were not in the line of the fire. He had driven one of the ranch’s four-wheelers to the pasture. With his cellphone, he had taken a few photos of the smoke, which was still far away and looked to be only a couple of football fields in width. But by the time Cody and Sydney pulled into the west pasture, at around 4:30, conditions were quickly changing. The smoke was getting closer, and below the smoke was a visible line of fire. Sloan called Liesl and told her that she, her mother, and the kids needed to leave the ranch immediately. A photo of the March 6 fire on the Franklin Ranch taken by Sloan just minutes before he attempted to save his cattle. Sloan, however, wasn’t going anywhere. Neither was Cody. The young rancher and the young cowboy had devoted their lives to taking care of cattle, and they were not about to let those forty heifers and the newly born calves burn to death. “I’m not sure if city people will ever understand this,” says Magee, Cody’s boss. “But out here, you get up every morning and you think about what you need to do that’s best for your cows. That’s your responsibility. You look after cattle. You don’t think twice about it.” Sloan and Cody decided that the best way to save the heifers and calves was to move them to the south, so they’d be below the fire as it swept eastward. Cody unloaded Junior. He most likely told Sydney to drive the truck to a gate on the southern side of the west pasture and blow the truck’s horn. Most of the cattle, thinking they were about to be fed, would have followed the truck. Cody, who was on Junior, and Sloan, who was on the four-wheeler, trailed behind the herd, pushing along the heavily pregnant heifers that were moving more slowly. They must have constantly been looking over their shoulders, staring at the smoke, trying to track the fire’s progress. Sloan made another quick call to Liesl to make sure that they had left the ranch. (They had.) But the call went straight to Liesl’s voicemail. (Cell service on Panhandle ranches is notoriously spotty.) When Liesl later played back the message, she could hear Sloan calling to his heifers, making a yip yip yip sound. At the end of the message, she heard him say “Liesl?” And then the line went dead. The gate at the southern end of the west pasture led to the neighboring Gething Ranch. Sydney probably jumped out of the truck to open the gate, and the heifers trudged into an empty pasture, their big bodies swaying and their heads swinging. The calves, some of them only a week old, trotted next to their mothers. Sloan, Cody, and Sydney had to have felt a sense of relief—perhaps even jubilation. They could see the smoke was headed due east. They—and the cattle—were out of the line of fire. But at around 5:30, the wind inexplicably shifted, ever so slightly. Instead of blowing straight out of the west, it started coming from the northwest. Panhandle residents standing in their front yards would barely have noticed the change. But on the Gething Ranch, Sloan, Cody, and Sydney must have immediately sensed what was happening. The fire, now veering in a southeasterly direction, was moving straight toward them. Cody knew the Gething well. As a teenager, he’d done “day work” (what cowboys call part-time work) on the ranch. He knew its pastures were dotted with sand hills, which look somewhat like sand dunes next to a seashore, except that the hills are covered with grass and scrub brush. And the sand hills offered a chance of survival. If they could get on top of a hill, it was possible that the fire would stay in a draw, go around the hill, and miss them altogether. There is no way of knowing exactly what happened next. But here is one likely scenario. Cody and Sydney climbed onto Junior and headed up the closest hill, leaving the truck and trailer behind. Sloan was right behind them on his four-wheeler. Sydney wrapped her arms around Cody’s waist, hanging on for dear life. When Cody turned in his saddle, he could see the fire. It was writhing up the hill, spitting red sparks, with columns of throat-clogging smoke swirling in front of the flames. The burning twigs on the bushes crackled like gunfire. At some point, Sloan lost control of the four-wheeler and was thrown to the ground. (The four-wheeler was later found tangled in a barbed-wire fence.) Cody and Sydney also ended up on the ground. Either a terrified Junior bucked them off his back, or the horse stumbled in the sand, fell to his knees, and rolled. Sloan, Cody, and Sydney did the only thing they could do: they ran. Soon, smoke enveloped them like a gray-black curtain, shutting out the world. They couldn’t see or breathe. Disoriented, they ran in different directions, gasping for air, pumping their legs through the sand as fast as they could. They didn’t get far. Within seconds, the flames were on top of them. The fire kept pushing eastward until the volunteer fire departments and the forest service eventually got it under control. On a bluff above the Franklin, several cowboys gathered. Joe Magee, his son Destry, and Cody’s father, Brock, were also there. Because Cody hadn’t returned their texts or calls for the past couple of hours, they knew something was wrong. They hooked their thumbs over their belts and squinted toward the distant burned-out pastures. They didn’t say much. One of Magee’s cowboys, 37-year-old Sy Brown, pulled up in his truck. When he’s not working on a Magee ranch, Brown serves as the volunteer fire chief for the town of Lefors, not far from where the fire had started. Brown told the other men that he had just driven past the ranch headquarters, which the fire had skirted (partly because the lawns around the homes and the outbuildings were well watered, freshly mowed, and contained no dry grass). He also had driven through the west pasture and through some of the northern pastures, but he hadn’t spotted Cody, Sydney, or Sloan. “I don’t know,” Brown said quietly. “Maybe they went south, to the Gething.” Evening was coming on. The sun was dropping behind the horizon. Joe, Destry, and Brock piled into a truck and drove the fence line between the Franklin and the Gething. Huddled against a corner fence was Junior. His hair was burned down to the skin and his saddle blanket was smoldering. He was in such pain he couldn’t look up. Brock got out of the truck and jerked the saddle and saddle blanket off the horse. Joe leaned against the pickup and looked at Brock. “We’ve got a wreck on our hands,” he said. A few of the cowboys spread out in a single line, thirty or forty yards apart, and they started walking through the Gething pasture, using the flashlights on their cellphones to guide their way. The ground was still warm from the fire, the heat seeping up through their boots, but they kept walking. Every few yards or so, they’d do an old-fashioned “brush call”: shouting “woo-woo” to one another so that they knew they were maintaining a straight line. (When working brushy pastures, looking for stray cattle, cowboys on horseback have long used the same call.) As they ascended one of the sand hills, they heard a feeble cry. “Hey.” It was Cody. Brock and the others ran up the sand hill. Sydney was on the ground, curled up like a kitten, lifeless. Forty yards away, on his back, was Cody. His clothes had been burned off. The only things remaining on his body were his leather Western belt, his Bustamante boots, and the spurs he’d gotten his senior year of high school. “Dad, I’m sorry,” Cody said. “I’m sorry.” “Son, you did nothing wrong,” Brock replied, cradling Cody’s head in his arms. Cody’s skin was almost black from his burns, his hair gone. He told his father he was cold. Brock stripped off his shirt and wrapped it around his son. “I’ve come a long way, Dad,” said Cody, who seemed to be getting delirious. “I know, honey,” Brock said. He then called Kristie and said, “You need to get on out here. It’s bad.” Fifty yards away, one of the other cowboys, 32-year-old Derek Kincannon, found Sloan. He too was naked except for his boots and belt. “Sir, please help me,” Sloan whispered. Kincannon had no idea what to do. He finally held Sloan’s hand and said, “You just keep breathing. Help is on its way.” By then, Liesl had returned with her mother and the children to their ranch house. Someone called and let them know that Sloan and Cody had been found alive and that medical helicopters were on their way to the Gething to transport the men to a hospital in Amarillo. More cowboys and volunteer firefighters got to the sand hill in their pickups and grass rigs. They formed a circle with the trucks and turned on their brights so the helicopters would know where to land. When the first helicopter touched down, a paramedic ran over to Sloan. He took one look at him and began reciting the 23rd Psalm. Sloan moved his lips. The paramedic thought he was trying to recite the psalm along with him. By the time the second helicopter arrived, Kristie and Cody’s two brothers, Clay and Ben, were at his side. Paramedics lifted Cody onto a backboard. “Thank y’all for coming,” Cody said to the paramedics just before they sedated him. Sloan died before he got to the hospital. Cody died minutes after he was wheeled into the emergency room. Back at the Gething, a justice of the peace arrived to examine Sydney’s body and officially pronounce her cause of death. She was wrapped in a sheet, placed in the backseat of a pickup, and driven to a funeral home in the nearby town of Pampa. Meanwhile, one of Magee’s cowboys went looking for Junior. He shot the horse in the head, putting him out of his misery. Everyone prepared to go home. In the darkness, some heifers and calves began ambling from the Gething to the open gate that led to the west pasture. It was Sloan’s herd. Incredibly, except for three calves, all of them had escaped the fire—apparently, they had kept moving south away from the flames—and now they were returning to the pasture that they knew best. Against all odds, Cody, Sydney, and Sloan had saved the cattle. Video Player 00:0000:00 The next morning was chilly but beautiful. The wind was gone, and the skies clear except for a few lingering wisps of smoke. As friends gathered at the Crockett home, Brock went off to feed cattle and patch some fence at his ranch. “That’s what you do out here,” he says. “You get up and do your job.” When he got home that afternoon, he opened a hospital bag and pulled out Cody’s belt, boots, and spurs. He set them on the floor next to his own bed. All that Liesl got back was Sloan’s cellphone, which, incredibly, was still working (he had carried it in a waterproof and fireproof phone case), and his wedding ring, which had soot on it. Sydney’s mother, Lisa, received Sydney’s Apple Watch and a pair of earrings. Two days after the fire, Lisa drove up to the Panhandle with her husband. Along with Sydney’s father, Stephen Wallace, and his wife, they went to the Gething pasture with Brock and Kristie. At the spot where Sydney had been found, Lisa and Stephen scooped some sand into bottles. “Sometimes I ask myself, ‘How could this have happened?’ ” Lisa says. “Three wonderful young people, taken away by a wild fire. How could such a thing have happened?” I'M NOT SURE IF CITY PEOPLE WILL EVER UNDERSTAND THIS. BUT OUT HERE, YOU GET UP EVERY MORNING AND THINK ABOUT WHAT YOU NEED TO DO FOR YOUR COWS. THAT'S YOUR RESPONSIBILITY. YOU LOOK AFTER CATTLE. YOU DON'T THINK TWICE ABOUT IT. Lisa brought Dale back to her home. At a Methodist church in Round Rock, north of Austin, where Sydney had been baptized as a baby, close to 400 mourners attended her funeral. Propped on top of the casket was a photo of Sydney and Cody. During Sloan’s funeral at Breckenridge’s First Baptist Church, which was attended by more than 750 mourners, a video was played of Sloan singing “My Rifle, My Pony and Me.” In their eulogies, his friends described him as the finest man they had ever met. His father, Jim, spoke last. “I know the Lord was there with him in that fire,” he said, “and I know that He protected him from the pain, and that He was waiting there to take him with Him into indescribable joy.” For several seconds, there was silence as Jim tried not to sob. At the One Way Church in McLean (the biggest church in town), more than a thousand people showed up for Cody’s funeral, the crowd so large that it spilled onto the street. The fourteen pallbearers—his two brothers and twelve of his cowboy friends, young men with names such as Cutter and Kaleton—wore their best cowboy boots, starched jeans, starched white button-down shirts adorned with a single carnation, and their cowboy hats. In his message, Pastor Haynes told the crowd, “Cody was doing what he loved to do. . . . A better cowboy you cannot find.” At the end of the service, the saddle that had been on Junior the night of the fire was placed on top of Cody’s casket. There was a procession to the city cemetery, and Cody and his saddle were buried next to the graves of his great-grandparents. The tragedy reverberated through America’s rural communities. On Facebook pages and websites devoted to farming and ranching, there were countless postings about Sloan’s, Cody’s, and Sydney’s deaths. (“Only the good die young,” someone wrote. “Maybe God needed them to help with ‘the cattle on a thousand hills,’ ” wrote someone else, quoting from the Book of Psalms.) Amy Dean, a grandmother from Colorado, wrote and recorded “Cowboys With Wings,” a song memorializing Sloan, Cody, and Sydney. It was the first song she’d ever released. An Amarillo Christian rock musician, Matt Dietz, recorded a tribute song that he titled “Amarillo Burned.” People who had never met Sloan, Cody, or Sydney mailed cards and letters to their families. Cowboys from as far away as Waco showed up at the Crockett ranch and asked Brock if he needed any help. Throughout the southern Great Plains, families who were affected by the fires were overwhelmed with donations, receiving everything from bales of hay to covered-dish suppers. Teenagers who belonged to 4-H clubs and Future Farmers of America chapters helped with the cleanup. “Some girls from Oklahoma State who were on spring break showed up and asked if they could clean ranch houses,” Magee says. He pauses and shakes his head. “There’s a lot of love among ranching people. But Lord, it can be a tough business. Lord, it can be tough.” Crosses mark where Cody, Sydney, and Sloan were found on the Gething Ranch. Alice Franklin On that single March afternoon, at least 32 fires broke out in the southern Great Plains, scorching more than 1.2 million acres, “the largest individual Plains fire outbreak documented in the modern era,” says Lindley, the National Weather Service meteorologist. The amount of damage totaled tens of millions of dollars. Scattered throughout the pastures were at least a couple of thousand dead cows. Other cows and calves were burned so badly—“staggering around like broken toys,” wrote one reporter—that they were shot and carried by bulldozers to large pits for burial. Besides the deaths in Texas, a 63-year-old Oklahoma woman suffered a fatal heart attack as she and her husband tried to put out a fire that threatened their farm. In Kansas, a trucker suffocated when his semi jackknifed on a highway that was blanketed with smoke. Ironically, in mid-March, bountiful showers passed over the Panhandle, and by the first of May, carpets of new grass were already sprouting up in the blackened pastures. At the Franklin Ranch, Liesl’s family hosted a steak dinner to honor the cowboys, the volunteer firefighters, and the paramedics who had been at their ranch and at the Gething during the blaze. Everyone tried to make small talk around the tables. A couple of the cowboys began to say how much they were going to miss Sloan, Cody, and Sydney, but they got choked up. Before the dinner ended, at about 9 p.m.—the cowboys had to get home to bed to be ready for work the next morning—someone asked Liesl about her new baby, due in August. Liesl said she was having a boy. What are you going to name him? someone else asked. Well, Liesl said, since Samuel Sloan is already named after his daddy, she wanted to name the baby after a young man she knew who was never going to have kids. A young man whom she deeply admired, she said, who during his life had been earnest and kind and courageous. A young man who deserved some sort of legacy. There was a silence. “I’m going to call my baby Cody,” she said. Copyright © Texas Monthly 2017. All rights reserved. ShareThis Copy and Paste
