Building skills and proficiencies of the community college instructor of adult learners.
Moving into the fifth generation.
A model addressing institutional effectiveness: Preparing for regional accreditation.
Accomplishment of selected occupational programs in community colleges.
Why a consistent definition of transfer? An ERIC review.
The presidential image: Key to effective leadership.
A structural model for student outcomes: Assessment programs in community colleges.
An application of the Tinto model to the analysis of freshman persistence in a community college.
North Carolina Community College goals for the future.
The National Junior College Athletic Association: A study in organizational accountability.
We can longer love 'em and leave em: A paper on freshman retention.
Suggestions about the criteria used to evaluate administrators.
Factors contributing to job satisfaction at the community college.
Stress and the community/junior college presidency.
Managing a successful inmate-education program: Why and how?
Power networking for community college teachers.
Part-time instructors in the California community colleges: A need to revise current policies.
Faculty development: The literature.
Community college mission and goals development: A process-oriented approach.
Role of community college department chairs in faculty development.
Assessing assessment programs: The theory and practice of examining reliability and validity of a...
Tribally controlled community colleges: A student outcomes assessment of associate degree...
Competencies and personal characteristics of future community college presidents.
The status of tenured faculty evaluation in the community college.
Can community colleges provide the training for educators of adults?
The Emerging Knowledge Base in Teacher Education and Faculty Renewal and Program Redesign at Glassboro (NJ) State College.
Selecting a Process for Evaluating Teacher Education Programs.
Supervision of Student Teachers: The Role of the College Supervisor.
Parsing Pedagogy: A Look at Some Important Variables.
Linking Staff Renewal to Student Achievement.
Organizing Schools for Teacher Collegiality: The New York City Experience.
OLD DOMINION UNIVERSITY.
EDUCATION IN THE JEFFERSONIAN TRADITION.
VIRGINIA TECH: RESPONSIVE TO TODAY'S WORLD.
THE JONES INSTITUTE OF EASTERN VIRGINIA.
THE VIRGINIA COMMUNITY COLLEGE SYSTEM.
FAIRFAX COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOLS AN EXEMPLARY SYSTEM.
READING-TO-LEARN: STATEWIDE PROJECT FOR STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT AND TEACHER EFFECTIVENESS.
THE STATUS OF ELEMENTARY SCHOOL COUNSELING IN VIRGINIA.
A TEACHER'S OPEN LETTER ON OUR FAILING SCHOOL SYSTEM.
BEGINNING TEACHER PROGRAM: PERCEPTIONS OF POLICY.
A TEACHER'S VIEW OF PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH PUBLIC SECONDARY EDUCATION.
THE PHYSICIAN AND THE POOR: SOCIAL ORIENTATIONS IN HEALTH CARE.
THE AUTOMAT AS A METAPHOR FOR CLASSROOMS WITH BEHAVIORALLY DIFFICULT STUDENTS.
DIVERGENT THINKING VS. CONVERGENT THINKING - A GT ANOMALY.
LETTER TO PRESIDENT GEORGE BUSH FROM A SUMMER NEIGHBOR ON DRUGS IN OUR SCHOOLS.
A FIVE YEAR TEACHER EDUCATION PROGRAM: AN OLD IDEA.
STUDENTS AT RISK: ARE SECONDARY TEACHERS ABLE TO IDENTIFY POTENTIAL SCHOOL DROPOUTS.
REFOCUSING EDUCATION - ARE WE EDUCATING OR PROCESSING.
TEACHER SELF-ESTEEM: A TRIPLE-ROLE APPROACH TO THIS FORGOTTEN DIMENSION.
WORKING PARENTS AND SCHOOLS: IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE.
AN EXERCISE IN BEHAVIORAL ASSESSMENT AND ATTITUDE ADJUSTMENT.
PRE-KINDERGARTEN PROGRAMS: CHARACTERISTICS AND COSTS.
BEGINNING TEACHER INDUCTION: THE BRIDGE TO LIFELONG LEARNING.
THE USE OF AUTOGENIC FEEDBACK TRAINING AS AN INTERVENTION STRATEGY IN HEALTH CARE.
FOR SPACIOUS SKIES: TO CAPTURE THE MAGNIFICENCE OF GOD'S CREATION.
USING SIMULATION AS AN INTEGRATED TEACHING TOOL IN THE MATHEMATICS CLASSROOM.
The therapeutic implications of working with the Black family.
Multisensory approaches for teaching handwriting to learning-disabled children.
The influence of teacher gender and student grade level on student teachers' beliefs concerning...
Chemical dependency rehabilitation where fostering fitness is an integral part of the process.
A categorical analysis of children's self-talk during independent school assignments.
The role of mental practice in the acquisition and performance of motor skills.
Games or drill: Increasing the multiplication skills of students.
Educators' identification of salient principles of learning.
Effects of the use of focused freewriting activities on secondary preservice teachers' critical...
Don't look for a panacea with site based management.
Weekly administered formative tests of a modified format and student performance.
Effects of instructional strategies on the learning of organizational behavior by a large ...
Teacher competencies: What is the role of foundations of education?
Instructor-supplied notes and higher-order thinking.
Teaching children to think rationally.
Field trips: Extinction or survival.
Grandparent education.
Standardized tests: Irregularities in administering of tests which affect test results.
Rationale and responsibilities in the teaching of critical thinking to American schoolchildren.
The relationship of principals' leadership behavior and teachers' job satisfaction and...
Meeting the needs of the learning disabled preschooler: Suggestions for classroom activities.
Parental efficacy and the development of social competence in young children.
The alliance of science and mathematics: Helping it become a reality.
Making students `real' students in the learning environment.
Peer tutoring to increase spelling scores of the mildly mentally handicapped.
Research-based findings seldom incorporated in teacher in-service education.
Enhancing social communication skills.
Use of differential reinforcement of lower rates of behavior and self-monitoring with a...
The process of providing incentives.
The relationship of cognitive style and academic achievement in a Korean sample.
Administrative and technical solutions for problems of vision impaired college students: A...
The quest for identity, drug abuse, and identity crises.
Strategies for putting dependent and independent learners in the winner's circle.
The effects of homework on academic performance of learning disabled and nonhandicapped math...
Computer assisted instruction with senior citizens.
Special classes for academically gifted youth.
The Talented and Gifted Programme at Centennial Regional High School.
Emergence and maintenance of leadership among gifted students in group problem solving.
Gifted adolescent females' attitudes toward gender equality in educational and inter-gender...
Classroom teachers' concerns and recommendations for improvement of gifted programs.
The social and nonsocial behaviors of precocious preschoolers during free play.
Leta Stetter Hollingworth: A personal profile of Nebraska's pioneering psychologist.
Leta Stetter Hollingworth: Pioneer woman of psychology.
Leta Stetter Hollingworth: Psychologist, educator, feminist.
Ms. Pilgrim's progress and commentary.
Contributions of Leta Hollingworth to school psychology.
Leta Hollingworth's contributions to above-level testing of the gifted.
Leata Hollingworth's contributions to the psychology and education of the gifted.
Intellectual abilities and psychological intensities in young children: Implications for the gifted.
Selecting instruments for identifying gifted and talented students.
Identification of gifted children: A comparison of the scores on Stanford-Biner 4th edition and...
Successful identification of gifted racial/ethnic group students without changing classification...
On discovering the hidden treasure of gifted and talented black children.
Life and death of a gifted program: Lessons not yet learned.
Keller's personalized system of instruction in a junior high gifted program.
Online database searches in gifted student independent study: Investigating the limits.
The application of rational-emotive theory and therapy to school-aged children.
An overview of chronometric measures of intelligence.
Dynamic approaches to psychoeducational assessment.
Planning, attention, simultaneous, and successive cognitive processes as a model for assessment.
Cognitive processing versus traditional intelligence: Diagnostic utility, intervention...
The dynamic assessment of intelligence: A review of three approaches.
Patterns and prevalence of core profile types in the WPPSI standardization sample.
Confirmatory factor analysis of the K-ABC and WISC-R for at-risk students: A comparison of...
Differences in students' home environments: The need to work with families.
Multiple orthographic codes: Key to alternative instructional methodologies for developing the...
Comparisons of school psychologists in the city and country: Is there a `rural' school psychology?
The relation between performance feedback and job attitudes among school psychologists.
Facilitating mainstreaming of students with behavioral disorders using classwide peer tutoring.
THE MADONNA OF MEDJUGORJE: RELIGIOUS RIVALRY AND THE FORMATION OF A DEVOTIONAL MOVEMENT IN YUGOSLAVIA.
GENERATIONS DIVORCED: THE MUTATION OF FAMILISM AMONG ATLAS MOUNTAINS IMMIGRANTS IN ISRAEL.
LONGING FOR LOCAL IDENTITY: INTERVILLAGE RELATIONS IN AN ITALIAN MOUNTAIN AREA.
NOTES ON COMMUNITY, HEGEMONY, AND THE USES OF THE PAST.
THE INCORPORATION OF A MARGINAL COMMUNITY WITHIN THE SINHALESE NATION.
THE PALESTINIAN PEASANT AS NATIONAL SIGNIFIER.
CONFABULATIONS OF COMMUNITY: THE HAMEFARINS AND POLITICAL DISCOURSE ON SHETLAND.
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF NATIONAL IDENTITY IN HIGHLAND ECUADOR.
ICONS AND IDENTITY: RELIGIOUS ORTHODOXY AND SOCIAL PRACTICE IN RURAL CRETE.
COGNITIVE MODELS IN LIFE HISTORIES.
ARE ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER COUNTERREVOLUTIONARY?: RHETORIC AND THE RECONSTRUCTION OF PORTUGUESE POLITICS.
Institutional requirements for stable money in an integrated world economy.
Worldwide currency competition: A guarantor of stable money.
A monetary constitution for Europe?
Approaches to monetary control.
Avoiding monetary protectionism: The role of policy coordination.
The folly of policy coordination.
Autonomy and coordination of monetary policy in a global economic order.
Political democracy: Conceptual and measurement traps.
Cross-national models of fertility, family planning, and development: Testing for reciprocal...
North American natural gas markets: Summary of an energy modeling forum study.
Structure and organization of the natural gas industry: Differences between the United States...
Cafe or price?: An analysis of the effects of federal fuel economy regulations and gasoline...
The U.S. demand for highway travel and motor fuel.
An empirical test of an electric utility under an allowable rate of return.
Analyzing oil production in developing countries: A case study of Egypt.
OPEC behaviour under falling prices: Implications for cartel stability.
Future world oil prices and production levels: A comment.
Integrating direct metering and conditional demand analysis...
Customer responsiveness to real-time pricing of electricity.
Big man, past and present: Model, person, hero, legend.
Class resistance and class hegemony: From conflict to co-optation in the citrus industry of Belize.
Spatial politics and verbal performance in urban Senegal.
Settlement of violence in Bedouin society.
From charismatic leader to anti-hero: The life and legacy of Irakau as cultural allegory.
Migratory patterns of vendors in a Guatemalan market.
Big men: Afterthoughts.
The emergence of virtual groups.
Banana beer, reciprocity, and ancestor propitiation among the Haya of Bukoba, Tanzania.
Big men as ancestors: Inspiration and copyrights on Tanna (Vanuatu).
Bargaining for gender identity: Love, sex, and money in an Israeli moshav.
Ecology and conquest: Critical notes on Kelly's model of Nuer expansion.
Bifurcate merging terminology and step-bifurcate collateral terminology: A cross-cultural study.
Which way for long-term-care financing?
Dispelling some myths.
Who cares about long-term care?
The politics of financing long-term care.
LTC Insurance: It's your choice.
Women's reproductive changes: A marker, not a turning point.
Women and men in the caregiving role.
Gender and family issues in minority groups.
Alone and poor.
Gender and work at midlife & beyond.
Labor market progeria.
Public policies: Are they gender-neutral?
Gender & public policy.
A perspective on women in politics: Political mobilization & older women.
Growing old: It's different for men and women.
Boom towns of the Amazon.
Sacred leaves of Brazilian candomble.
Physician supply in the Soviet Union 1940-1985.
Dynamics of management and planning policy.
A cultural interpretation of Inuit map accuracy.
The editorial legacy of Gladys M. Wrigley.
Political geography of panregions.
Geometry of boundary exchanges.
Place in the American Christmas.
Geography and Chinese poetry.
English village street names.
The concept of intrinsic value and depositional coastal landforms.
Forest-product use in upland Nepal.
Geography of the intifada.
Political economy's response to positivism.
Settlement patterns on the Mescalero Apache reservation since 1883.
Changing pattern of retirement counties since 1965.
International automobile trade of the United States during the 1980s.
Soviet air-passenger transportation network.
NATIONAL HEALTH LINE.
POLICIES TO ENHANCE COORDINATION IN HOSPITAL-BASED CASE MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS.
SOCIAL WORK MANAGEMENT IN EMERGING HEALTH CARE SYSTEMS.
GROUP WORK IN A PRIMARY CARE MEDICAL SETTING.
AUTONOMY AND PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES OF SOCIAL WORKERS IN HOSPITAL AND PRIMARY HEALTH CARE SETTINGS.
COMPLICATIONS IN DISCHARGE PLANNING WITH MEDICARE PATIENTS.
HOSPITAL GRADUATE SOCIAL WORK FIELD WORK PROGRAMS: A STUDY IN NEW YORK CITY.
SCREENING ELDER CARDIAC PATIENTS TO IDENTIFY NEED FOR SOCIAL WORK SERVICES.
MAINTAINING SOCIAL WORK STANDARDS IN FOR-PROFIT HOSPITALS.
GENETICS, GROUP LIFE, AND SOCIAL WORK WITH GROUPS IN HEALTH CARE PRACTICE: A NEED FOR KNOWLEDGE AND SKILL.
NATIONAL HEALTH LINE.
GENETIC SUPPORT GROUPS AND SOCIAL WORKERS AS PARTNERS.
COMING UP SHORT: THE PHYSICAL, COGNITIVE, AND SOCIAL EFFECTS OF TURNER'S SYNDROME.
TOURETTE SYNDROME IN CHILDREN: KNOWLEDGE AND SERVICES.
BURNOUT AMONG SOCIAL WORKERS WORKING WITH PATIENTS WITH CYSTIC FIBROSIS.
ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF PSYCHOSOCIAL STRESS IN LUNG TRANSPLANT CANDIDATES.
RISK FACTORS TO HEALTH IN DIABETIC CHILDREN: A PROSPECTIVE STUDY FROM DIAGNOSES.
COGNITIVE AND BEHAVIORAL DETERMINANTS OF COMPLIANCE IN DIABETICS.
THE INTERIM HOMECARE PROGRAM: AN INNOVATIVE DISCHARGE PLANNING ALTERNATIVE.
Guest editorial: Toward an understanding of concepts in...
Guest editorial: Dollarmania and sport.
Simplification of the Talent-N-Timing Tennis Test for...
Running pattern characteristics of motorically delayed...
Effects of instruction in throwing performances of sixth...
Teacher-coach burnout and coping strategies.
A review of teacher induction: Are special programs...
Role conflict, coaching burnout and the reduction in the number of female interscholastic coaches.
The portrayal of physical activities on Saturday morning children's programming.
Sexual harassment in sports.
A critical need in the professional preparation of physical educators and coaches: A course in...
Student attitudes toward drug testing of college athletes.
The effects of self-assessment on selected teaching behaviors of an elementary student teacher.
The relationship of exercise physiology to human performance.
A case analysis of an ethical problem: Use of a required text.
Strategies for improving student learning and the status of physical education.
Management of disruptive behavior in physical education.
An analysis of the clinical experience in teacher education in physical education within...
Examining skill development in physical education classes: Science on a shoestring.
Dribbling performance in first-grade children: Effect of ball and hand size and ball-size...
Athletics, superstitions, and education: The coaching dilemma.
Guest editorial: The ten cardinal principles of physical...
Use of cognitive tests by secondary physical education...
Analysis of fitness activities in junior high school...
Throwing profiles of first and fourth grade boys and girls.
Allowing for body weight when measuring shoulder-girdle...
How to use verbal reprimands in a positive manner.
The pre-student teaching practicum: Don't leave it to...
An examination of policies and procedures used in the...
Current and recommended preparation of physical education...
Congressional despots, then and now.
Public opinion and the `Congress problem.'
The independent-counsel regime.
A conservative defense of Congress.
Congress and the courts.
Micromanaging foreign policy.
Micromanaging the administrative agencies.
Micromanaging the defense budget.
Still an American dilemma.
Employment testing and job performance.
Social psychology's "racism"
Literacy for blind and visually impaired school-age students.
Decreased Braille literacy: A symptom of a system in need of reassessment.
A call for questions.
Time to renorm the Bayley.
The future of training programs for teachers of the visually impaired: A commitment to life-long...
Orientation and mobility services to students with visual impairments enrolled in Iowa public...
Conducting dental examinations for visually impaired children: Methods and results.
The orientation and mobility assistant.
Supported employment: Does it really work?
Consumer skills for low vision middle school students.
Lesbians Under the Medical Gaze: Scientists Search for Remarkable Differences.
Putting a Big Thing into a Little Hole: Teenage Girls' Accounts of Sexual Initiation.
Pornography and Gender Equality: An Empirical Analysis.
The Cosmopolitan Ideology and the Management of Desire.
Problems Encountered in Writing the History of Sexuality: Sources, Theory and Interpretation.
Qualitative Research on Homosexual and Bisexual Behavior Relevant to HIV/AIDS.
Sex Differences in Sexual Fantasy: An Evolutionary Psychological Approach.
Sexual Behavior and AIDS Knowledge of Young Male Prostitutes in Manhattan.
Mapping the Boundaries of Courtship Disorder.
DRUG USE, PROSTITUTION AND THE PREVALENCE OF AIDS: An Analysis Using Census Tracts.
PERCEIVED PERSONAL IMMUNITY: BELIEFS ABOUT SUSCEPTIBILITY TO AIDS.
SEXUAL FANTASY EXPERIENCES AND GUILT AMONG CONSERVATIVE CHRISTIANS: AN EXPLORATORY STUDY.
RESPONSE TO KOOPMAN.
Managerial Evaluations by Men and Women Managers.
Life Stage Differences in Resident Coping With Restart of the Three Mile Island Nuclear Generating Facility.
Independence of Performance and Self-Report Measures of Distractibility.
Effects of Belief in Free Will or Determinism on Attitudes Toward Punishment and Locus of Control.
Post-Totalitarian Politics: Ideology Ends Again.
Does the End of Totalitarianism Signify the End of Ideology?
Socialism and Capitalism, Left and Right.
Rethinking the Past, Rehoping the Future.
Transition in Eastern Europe.
What Does It Mean to Be an "American"?
Bloomsbury, Freud, and the Vulgar Passions.
The Assenting Echo: Anglo-American Values in Contemporary Psychoanalytic Developmental Psychology.
Psychoanalysis in France: Act III.
The Reception of Psychoanalysis and the Problem of the Unconscious in Russia.
Buenos Aires: Latin Mecca of Psychoanalysis.
Vishnu on Freud's Desk: Psychoanalysis in Colonial India.
Cultural Adaptation to Psychoanalysis in Japan, 1912-52.
Anti-Semitism and the Body in Psychoanalysis.
Psychological aspects of exercise: A decade literature review.
Motivational cue effects on bench-press performance and self-efficacy.
Competitive state and competitive trait anxiety differences in non-elite runners.
Athletic dreams of masters track and field competitors.
Predicting baseball player performance.
Discrepant attitudes of intercollegiate athletes as a function of race.
The athletic career: Some contingencies of sport specialization.
Precompetitive mood state changes in collegiate rodeo athletes.
Fans' evaluations of Major League Baseball umpires' performances and perceptions of appropriate...
Gender differences in value orientation toward sports: A longitudinal analysis.
Implementing psychological skills training program in high school athletics.
Effect of home-field advantage on peak performance of baseball pitchers.
Behavior analysis of male and female coaches in high school girls' basketball.
Contest location, player misconduct, and race: A case from English soccer.
Early adolescent perceptions of parental pressure in the sport environment.
The relationship between competitive orientation and religious orientation.
Values held by prospective coaches towards women's sport participation.
Relationship between anabolic steroid use and selected psychological parameters in male...
Apartheid, the law and reform in South Africa.
Why is participation a dirty word in South African politics?
Detention without trial in South Africa: The abuse of human rights as state strategy in the late...
Undermining disinvestment: From a marginal propensity to invest to a propensity to invest in the...
Violations of the law of armed conflict: Liberia.
Francophone Africa: Transition to democracy?
The right to food...as a weapon?
Popular participation in non-governmental structures in Africa: Implications for Democratic...
The impending demise of Nigeria's forthcoming third republic.
Economic rights in West Africa.
Africa in brief.
Africa in Brief.
The African Right to Development: World Policy and the Debt Crisis.
Debt in the Eye of a Storm: The African Crisis in a Global Context.
Economic Modeling of Structural Adjustment Programs: Impact on Human Conditions.
IMF Conditionality & Polity Characteristics in Black Africa: An Exploratory Analysis.
Angola--Prospects for Peace Seem Brighter.
Golden streets, bitter tears: The Irish image of America during the era of mass migration.
The Irish as urban pioneers in the United States, 1850-1870.
`Drowning the Shamrock': Drink, teetotalism, and the Irish Catholics of Gilded-Age Pittsburgh.
A stage in the emergence of the Americanized synagogue among East European Jews: 1890-1910.
Unintentional immigrants: Chicago's Filipino foreign students become settlers, 1900-1941.
Growing up female in New Braunfels: Social and cultural adaptation in a German-Texas town.
Word medicine: Storytelling and magic realism in James Welch's Fools Crow.
Spotted cattle and deer: Spirit guides and symbols of endurance and healing in ceremony.
Special problems in teaching Leslie Marmon Silko's Ceremony.
In search of recognition: Federal Indian policy and the landless tribes of Western Washington.
`He was going along': Motion in the novels of James Welch.
The Southeast Syndrome: Notes on Indian descendant recruitment organizations and their...
The sun's in its heaven, all's not right with the world: Rejoinder to Swan.
Reprise of Swan's song and Farrer's chorus.
Guardians of tradition and handmaidens to change: Women's roles in Creek economic and social...
A Choctaw odyssey: The life of Lesa Phillip Roberts.
Trickster discourse.
Nineteenth century women and reform: The women's national Indian association.
`Truly dancing their own way': Modern revival and diffusion of the gourd dance.
On the treatment and reburial of human remains: The San Xavier Bridge Project, Tucson, Arizona.
`Man thinking'--nation and universe: The Einstein memorial at the National Academy of Sciences.
Recent trends in studying the presidency: Reagan and beyond.
Chicano literature: Introduction and bibliography.
American cultural literacy and Asian literature.
The Americanization of literary studies.
The Americanization of the French University and the response of the student movement, 1966-1986.
The reception of American films in the Netherlands: The interwar years.
Blackface minstrels in cross-cultural perspective.
Disney and the promotions of synthetic worlds.
Anti-American propaganda in Poland from 1948 to 1954: A story of an ideological failure.
Old history, new history, no history at all? The Vietnam war as affirmation of American values.
Factors contributing to the political ascendancy...
Homosexuality in the Middle East: An agenda for historical...
Structural change and Iraq's structure of production.
Human rights in the Arab world.
From the Balfour Declaration to World War II: The U.S. stand on Palestinian self-determination.
The Truman administration and the Palestinians.
Missed opportunities and roads not taken: The Eisenhower administration and the Palestinians.
The Kennedy/Johnson administrations and the Palestinians.
Nixon's Middle East policy: From balance to bias.
The Hong Kong special administrative region: From crown to Chinese colony.
Hong Kong's structural relationship with the Central Government in Beijing after 1997.
The future of Hong Kong: A countercyclical view.
The economic dimensions of 1997.
Political culture and participation in Macau.
New directions in China's arms for export policy: An analysis of China's military ties with Iran.
`Home' insurance for British nationals in Hong Kong?
China explodes at Tiananmen.
How the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan improved the U.S. strategic position in the...
The return to second-class citizenship in China.
The Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China.
AMERICA: AN HONEST BROKER.
BRINGING IN THE EAST.
REDISCOVERING LATIN AMERICA.
THE JAPAN PROBLEM REVISITED.
CHINA: ERRATIC STATE, FRUSTRATED SOCIETY.
DEMOCRACY: A GLOBAL REVOLUTION?
RETHINKING NATIONAL SECURITY.
DOES GORBACHEV MATTER ANYMORE?
THE LITHUANIAN CRISIS.
POLAND'S ECONOMIC REFORM.
AMERICA'S NEW SPECIAL RELATIONSHIPS.
JAPAN'S GRAND STRATEGY.
THE WORLD ECONOMY AFTER THE COLD WAR.
CUBA'S CLOUDY FUTURE.
RESHAPING THE MIDDLE EAST.
INTELLIGENCE IN THE AGE OF GLASNOST.
Post-revolutionary Mexico: The Salinas opening.
Guatemala in search of democracy.
Peru's APRA party in power: Impossible revolution, relinquished reform.
The Enterprise for the Americas Initiative: A new approach to economic growth.
Elections and democratization in Nicaragua: The 1990 elections in perspective.
Soviet foreign policy toward Latin America: Time for renewal.
The role of the Paraguayan Catholic Church in the downfall of the...
United States international drug policy: Recent developments and issues.
The economic impact of Andean cocaine traffic on Florida.
Alternative testing and the national agenda for control.
Educating for democracy.
Social studies for nation building.
Adding an international dimension to the curriculum.
Broadsides--A curious source for vivid historical inquiry.
Before the outline--The writing wheel.
Who's in the kitchen with Dinah? History!
Aborigines and Europeans.
Research and the teaching of social studies.
The social studies: In search of an epistemology.
The student in social studies education.
Teachers in social studies education.
Contexts of social studies education.
Review of teaching for and learning social studies outcome.
Classroom practice and education research.
Interrelation between social studies and other curriculum areas: a review.
International perspectives on research in social studies.
Democracy and democratic citizenship education. (cover story)
The knowledge base of democratic citizens.
Democratic values and their development.
Educating students for conflict resolution and democratic decision making.
Participation in democratic citizenship education.
Citizenship education for a pluralistic democratic society.
Democracy and technology.
A linguistic approach to social studies vocabulary development.
Should place vocabulary be central to primary social studies?
The IRAC method of case study analysis.
Tabwa masks.
Ancient wood figures from Sierra Leone.
Recollections of Haiti in the 1930s and '40s.
The challenge of history.
Portraiture in Africa.
Portraiture and the construction of reality in Yorubaland and beyond.
Yungur ancestral portraits. (cover story)
Obas' portraits in Benin.
Living icons of the Akan.
First word.
African portraiture: A commentary.
King Glele of Danhome.
Portraiture among the Lagoon peoples of Cote d'Ivoire.
The odyssey of the Afo-a-Kom.
Ateu Atsa, a Bangwa artist.
Color in Western art: An issue?
Time, history, and ritual on the Ara Pacis Augustae.
Marketing art in Antwerp, 1460-1560: Our Lady's Pand.
Quality vs. History: Schinkel's Altes Museum and Prussain arts policy.
The White Peril and L'Art nègre: Picasso, Primitivism, and anticolonialism.
Darkness in the age of light; Amnón of María Rosa Gálvez.
On the chronology of Spanish Conmigo, Contigo, Consigo and the interaction of phonological, ...
Back to the future: Criticism, the canon, and the nineteenth-century Spanish novel.
Defining allegory, or troping through Calderon's autos.
LO ÉPICO EN LA LÍRICA DE PABLO NERUDA.
UNAMUNO AND "THE DEATH OF THE AUTHOR".
MARIO VARGAS LLOSA: EL NOVELISTA COMO CRÍTICO.
DOUBLES IN HELL: EL BURLADOR DE SEVILLA Y CONVIDADO DE PIEDRA.
Back to the center: Hispanic American fiction today.
Unamuno and the religion of uncertainty.
`Bonifacio Y Dorotea' and the merchandising of love.
A Portuguese folk story and its early congeners.
Popularity: The sine qua non of popular culture.
Somos el Peru [we are Peru]: `Cumbia Andina' and the children of Andean migrants in Lima.
Spanish-language television in the United States: Televisa surrenders its domain.
Changing of the guard: Questions and contrasts of Brazilian rock phenomena.
Bajito y sauvecito [low and slow]: Low riding and the `class' of class.
The popular culture political persuasion in Paraguay: Communication and public art.
Through the pantalla Uruguaya [Uruguayan screen]: The television environment for children in...
More than just a mural: The popular memorial for Rodrigo Rojas de Negri and Carmen Gloria Quintana.
The masks of Judas: Folk and elite Holy Week tricksters in Michoacan, Mexico.
Anita Brenner: Cultural mediator for Mexico.
Cuba's Mujeres [women] magazine: The first twenty-five years.
The myth and the reality of `El Negro' Durazo: Mexico City's most-wanted police chief.
`Angel Malo' [`Bad Angel'], a Chilean telenovela.
The MENC adviser.
The key to describing music.
The role of hearing in understanding music.
Beyond objectivity.
What have we learned about building student interest?
Sound approaches to elementary music listening.
Teach your instrumental students to listen.
Do you hear what I hear?
Technology for teaching.
MENC today.
Technology standards for college music degrees.
Reporting progress with developmental profiles.
The MENC adviser.
R&D for better teaching.
Measuring musical response.
Shake well before using.
Solving instructional problems through research.
Making research work for you.
Instruments from around the world.
Early field experiences in the community.
Collegiate perspective.
Technology for teaching.
What makes them great?
How master teachers handle discipline.
How to spot it, how to avoid it.
Motivation and the master music teacher.
Interviewing successfully--the right moves.
A multifaceted approach.
Bulletin board.
Music education in tune with the times.
Recognizing the role of artistic intelligences.
Pedagogical scat.
Exploring the rich tradition of Jewish music.
Discover your band or orchestra's roots.
Public school and college music programs.
Can year-round scheduling work for your program?
The MENC adviser.
Collegiate perspective.
Introduction: Self-preservation and self-transformation: Interdisciplinary approaches to literary...
Textual considerations in the scientific construction of human character.
The construction of literary character: A view from cognitive psychology.
Straw people, hollow men, and the postmodernist hall of dissipating mirrors: The case of David...
Character and judgment in narrative and in lyric: Toward an understanding of the audience's...
Types of character, characteristics of types.
The representation of fictional character.
The what, the when, and the how of being a character in literary narrative.
Finding a character's voice in Smollett's Roderick Random.
The impossible world of the `schizophrenic': William Faulkner's Quentin Compson.
Freud's `On the Antithetical Sense of Primary Words': Psychoanalysis, art, and the antithetical...
Enunciation and ejaculation: Telling the erotic climax.
From pulpstyle to innerspace: The stylistics of American new-wave SF.
From duality to triplicity: The multidimensional undertaking of Jean Paulhan.
The utopian vision of French criticism.
The unity of thought, feeling, and expression in Corneilles's Cinna.
The making of a precursor: Carlyle in Yo El Supremo.
The experience of time in Mario Vargas Llosa's La Casa Verde.
L'Education sentimentale: Figural dimensions of Madame Arnoux.
A pox on love: Diagnosing Madame Bovary's blind beggar.
Moliere's `poststructuralism': Demolition of transcendentalist discourse in Le Tartuffe.
FROM BESO TO BESO: PUIG'S EXPERIMENTS WITH GENRE.
AT THE MARGINS OF SOCIAL REALISM: THE EARLY GOYTISOLO.
A POETIC FEAST: FOOD IMAGES IN GÓNGORA'S SATIRICAL AND BURLESQUE POEMS.
Conference opening.
Human resources: The key to Canada-U.S. competitiveness.
Discussion after the speech of Anthony P. Carnevale.
Impact of U.S. immigration law based upon international business.
Canadian immigration law and policy: A study in politics, demographics and economics.
Discussion after the speeches of Austin T. Fragomen and Ronald G. Atkey.
EC 1992: Human resources in a unified market implications for U.S.-Canada competitiveness.
Discussion after the speech of Charles M. Ludolph.
The impact of the free trade agreement on the flow of services between Canada and the United States.
The impact of the Free Trade Agreement on the flow of services and temporary business travel...
Discussion after the speeches of Colleen S. Morton and Meriel V.M. Bradford.
Designing retirement programs.
Human resources: A comparative look at the legal and tax environment for motivating and...
Discussion after the speeches of William Napoli Jr. and Donald A. McGrath.
Developing human resources: Participative management and employee involvement: Slogans and reality?
Participative management and employee involvement: Slogans and reality?
Discussion after the speeches of Ben Fischer and William K. Rusak.
Representation of employees and the role of unions in the United States and Canada: The union...
Competitiveness and the trade union response: The internal and external labor market linkages.
Discussion after the speeches of Irving Bluestone and Peter Warrian.
Hiring, termination and regulation of employees in the Canadian workplace.
Discussion after the speeches of David J. Millstone and Roy L. Heenan.
Comparative competitive aspects of Japanese use of human resources vis-a-vis United States and...
Discussion after the speech of Norihiro Takeuchi.
U.S. taxation of U.S. citizens living in Canada and Canadians subject to U.S. taxes.
The importance of `being taken': To clarify and confirm the litigative reconstruction of CERCLA's...
Economic development, democratization, and environmental protection in Eastern Europe.
Marine pollution, fishers, and the pillars of the land: A tort recovery standard for pure...
Houses on the sand: Takings issues surrounding statutory restrictions on the use of oceanfront...
Substantive standards and NEPA: Mitigating environmental consequences with consent decrees.
Drawing the line between administrative and criminal searches: Defining the `object of the...
William T.R. Fox and the study of world politics.
Realist thought and neorealist theory.
The hard facts of international theory.
Woe to the orphans of the scientific revolution.
Models and cases in the study of international conflict.
Alliance theory: A neorealist first cut.
Soviet foreign policy and world politics.
Toward a theory of international regimes.
Limits and possibilities of weak theory: Interpreting North-South.
Law and politics in international relations: State and human values.
Reason and change in international life: Justifying a hypothesis.
Missouri v. Jenkins: The perverse case for judicial activism.
Understanding and teaching the semantics of terrorism: An alternative perspective.
Teaching political science in China: Observations and suggestions from a foreign visitor.
Understanding federalism.
Ronald Reagan and the Russians.
Reaganomics: Myth and reality.
The Reagan NSC: Before and after.
Liberal education.
Allan Bloom's message to the state universities.
Liberal education and the study of politics in a Catholic university.
The politicization of liberal education.
The Reagan doctrine in perspective.
An early assessment of Reagan defense policy and programs.
A new foreign policy consensus?
Commentary in the public interest.
A policy is born.
Waging the war of ideas.
Conclusion.
The McGovern catalyst: The neoconservative response, 1972.
Reconstructing Germany.
A chronology of events the collapse of the German Democratic Republic (GDR) and steps toward...
Security for the new Germany in the new Europe.
Germany relates to the world.
Copenhagen: A democratic manifesto.
Building the house of democracy.
The rule of law and free elections.
The miner's canary and minority rights.
CSCE: A triumph of the human spirit.
Democracy and the rule of law.
Concluding document CSCE, Copenhagen.
Chronology of events related to the 1989 Tiananmen Square Incident.
Declaration to support democratic reform in mainland China.
On freedom of speech of the opposition.
Tiananmen Square hunger strike declaration.
China is hardly a republic.
What kind of democracy do we need?
Declaration on the establishment of the Chinese Democratic Front.
Speech at the meeting in celebration of the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the People's...
Potential application of photoplethysmography technique in evaluating microcirculatory status of...
Below-knee amputee gait with dynamic elastic response prosthetic feet: A pilot study.
Analysis of below-knee suspension systems: Effect on gait.
Static pressure seal of earmolds.
Evaluation of a fiber optic glove for semi-automated goniometric measurements.
Toward the development of consumer-based criteria for the evaluation of assistive devices.
Effect of velocity and SF/SL ratio on external work and gait movement waveforms.
Load-bearing characteristics of polyethylene foam: An examination of structural and compression properties.
Sitting forces and wheelchair mechanics.
Audio-visual consonant recognition with the 3M/House cochlear implant.
A test suite for hearing aid evaluation.
A time-domain digital simulation of heating aid response.
Wheelchair racing sports science: A review.
Serial incontinence assessment in elderly inpatient men.
Operator performance in myoelectric control of a multifunction prosthesis stimulator.
Kinematics of sport wheelchair propulsion.
Preventing occupied wheelchairs from falling down stairs.
The effects of hearing aids on speech discrimination in noise by normal-hearing listeners.
Articulated cadaveric bones as a structural endoskeleton in an ankle-foot prosthesis: A...
Making the campus safe for bureaucracy: Reflections on the 1990 Carnegie Foundation report.
Partisan logic: An analysis of the content of American philosophy texts.
The case of Philippe Rushton.
Accreditation by quota: The case of Baruch College.
Liberal education and the natural bourgeoisie.
The American founders and the furnishings of mind.
The politicization of liberal education.
Professor at sea.
A dissent on diversity.
Ethics is as ethics does.
Making sense of the new academic disciplines.
The Sidney Hook Memorial Award address: On the self-suppression of academic freedom.
Yale University: Testing the limits.
Condoms, coercion, and Christianity: A Princeton tale.
A departmental self-portrait: Reflections upon the Duke English Newsletter.
Humanities? No. Liberal arts? Yes.
The institutionalization of racism at the University of California at Berkeley.
White Guilt.
The Prince, the People, and the Architects.
Literary Widows.
A Gathering of Family.
André Gide and the Homosexual Debate.
The Ph.D. squid.
Multiculturalism: E pluribus plures.
Guadalcanal.
Victorian philanthropy.
The shy little scholar of Holder Court.
Some philosophy: I.
Some philosophy: II.
Drifting through the MLA.
Pragmatic naturalism and the spiritual life.
Stein and Emerson.
Criticism now: The example of Wordsworth.
On Karl Miller.
New York reflections.
V.S. Naipaul: Turning in the South.
A trip with V.S. Naipaul.
Rorty's novum organum.
A current church-state battleground: Requiring clergy to report child abuse.
Magistrates, the minister's rate, and the question of authority: The case of...
Catholicism, social justice, and the Brazilian corporative state since 1930.
Towards a theology of nation-building: Church and state in Africa today.
Notes on church-state affairs: United States.
Text of U.S. Supreme Court decision: Board of Education of the Westside Community...
Religion and the East German revolution.
Religion as opiate: Church and revolution in comparative structural perspective.
Enshrinement and persistency of Japanese religion.
Erastianism in England to 1640.
Religious liberty and the abortion debate.
Is Japanese English education changing?
Textual schemata and English language learning.
Visuals and imagination.
Oral language taping and analysis for teacher training.
Who does what with errors?
Expanding the intercultural perspective.
Rapid-Fire Questions for better communication.
An American comprehensive public university linked with a Japanese municipality.
The internationalization of an American university.
An American university English language institute in Japan.
Teaching in Japan: Excerpts from the Temple University Japan Faculty Guide.
Profiting from education: Japan-United States international educational ventures in the 1980s.
The role and value of accreditation in American higher education: At home and abroad.
Preparing Malaysian students for American university education.
The globalization of education: A Malaysian perspective.
The ways of desire.
The god in the moment.
Jesus the liberator of desire.
Eucharistic ecology and ecological spirituality.
Exodus in not enough.
Newton, Maimonides, and esoteric knowledge.
From liberation to wilderness: South Arica's new journey.
Verbal uncertainty expressions: A critical review of two decades of research.
Buddhist psychology: A review of theory and practice.
The Depression Proneness Rating Scale: Reliability, validity, and factor structure.
Reaction times and intelligence.
Sex-dependent habituation to novelty in rats.
Vasopressin, maternal behavior, and pup well-being.
Personality influences in the stability of early (teen-age) marriage in the United...
Determining the sample size for a replication attempt: A short and simple microcomputer program.
Prototyping `intelligent' applications for interactive multimedia systems.
Learning with a computer-based advisor.
The electronic teaching theater: Interactive hypermedia and mental models of the classroom.
Navigation, browsing, and understanding in an anatomical `hypermedia' environment.
STEREO: A program to analyze stereotyped open field locomotion.
Correlates of personal productivity of supervisors: Perceptions of American and Japanese managers.
Competition, cooperation, satisfaction, and the performance of complex tasks among Air Force cadets.
The etiology of schizophrenia as perceived by psychiatrists in Europe and the United States.
Overt responding in computer-based training.
Short versus long term gains of a cognitive-behavioral social skills program targeting the giving...
Critical flicker fusion in primary degenerative dementia of the Alzheimer's type (PDDAT)...
Units of analysis and item statistics for environmental assessment scales.
Blaming the victim: When disease-prevention programs misfire.
Are property rights problematic?
When is original appropriation required?*.
Self-ownership and the right of property.
Ownership as theft.
Property, entitlement, and remedy.
The moral foundations of intangible property*.
Property in science and the market.
Economists and philosophers as critics of the free enterprise system.
The shaman's initiation.
Four basic archetypal ways found in shamanic traditions.
Mystical experience in Tamang shamanism.
Shamanic cosmology: A psychological examination of the shaman's worldview.
Personal disarmament: Negotiating with the inner government.
The expanding boundaries of memory.
Psychological trauma, or unexperienced experience.
Two patterns of transcendence.
Germanic mythology and the fate of Europe.
Place and power.
The bridge to nothingness: Gnosis, Kabbala, existentialism, and the transcendental predicament of...
The transfiguration of the Western mind.
Theology and culture at mid-century: The example of Henri De Lubac.
Reflections on the moral status of the pre-embryo.
Do we want a Christian economics? The U.S. bishops' pastoral letter.
The recovery of theology as a practical discipline.
The function of the Trinity in Moltmann's ecological doctrine of creation.
`Only something good can be evil': The secular genesis of Augustine's secular ambivalence.
Newman, conversion, and ecumenism.
Revisionists, deontologists, and the structure of moral understanding.
Narrative contexts, doctrinal reform.
Congressional Oversight of the Department of Defense: Reconsidering the Conventional Wisdom.
B. H. Liddell Hart and the Creation of a Theory of War, 1919-1933.
The State, Capitalism, and World War II: The U.S. Case.
The Eritrean War.
The Royalist Army of New Spain, 1810-1821: Militarism, Praetorianism, or Protection of Interests?
Telephone Use by Peacekeeping Troops in the Sinai.
Militarization, Military Regimes, and the General Quality of Life in the Third World.
The Delegitimization of Nuclear Deterrence?
The U.S. Print Media and the Conventional Military Balance in Europe.
Democratic Currents in Authoritarian Seas: The Military in Greece and the Philippines.
Military Coups, Regime Change, and Interstate Conflicts in West Africa.
Effects of Service in Vietnam on Canadian Forces Military Personnel.
The Education of Military Officers in the Federal Republic of Germany.
Debt-for-nature swaps and the need for alternatives. (cover story)
Crossing the next meridian.
SALT of the EARTH. Secondary Soil Salinization in the Australian Wheat Belt. (cover story)
DEVELOPING CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGIES.
Curbing Auto Emissions in Europe.
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES on Sustainable Development. (cover story)
Ecological Concepts of SUSTAINABILITY.
INNOVATIONS IN International Environmental Governance.
ANTARCTICA. Ice Under Pressure. (cover story)
WILL RHODE ISLAND BE THE FIRST GREEN STATE?
HONG KONG. Can the dragon clean its nest?
Global Metal Pollution. (cover story)
ENERGY FOR OUR GLOBE'S PEOPLE.
DID EARTH DAY CHANGE THE WORLD?
Perceptual Variation and the Implementation of Accounting Information Systems: An Empirical Investigation.
CO-STAR: A Semantic Representational Schema for Cost Management.
Frameworks, Paradigms, and Scientific Research in Management Information Systems.
Audit Technology and the Use of Computer Assisted Audit Techniques.
Interception Controls of Data Communications Systems.
Electronic Data Interchange: Foundations and Survey Evidence on Current Use.
Competing for the recreational dollar: An analysis of the...
Application of the Leslie model to commercial catch and...
Distribution and apparent abundance of the basking shark,...
Blue marlin, Makaira nigricans, movements in the western...
Thailand's shrimp culture growing.
The fisheries of Seychelles.
The Canadian salmon aquaculture industry.
The Spanish market for squid.
The fisheries and fish trade of India.
Biology and potential use of Pacific grenadier,...
NOAA/NMFS developments.
Foreign fishery developments.
Publications.
History of the fisheries of Raritan Bay, New York and...
Young Edwin Hubble. (cover story)
Cosmic impacts, cosmic catastrophes (Part 2).
Gamma-Ray Observatory: The next great observatory in space.
The Space Telescope: Eyes Above the Atmosphere.
Neutrinos from the sun: An astronomical puzzle.
Mapping the universe: Slices and bubbles. (cover story)
How we get pictures from space.
Eclipsing binary stars: The story of Algol and its ...
The origin of our constellations.
Hermann Carl Vogel: The Sixth Bruce medallist.
The hubble space telescope.
The 1990 A.S.P. Awards.
The society pages.
Cosmic rays: `A thin rain of charged particles'
The hubble space telescope: Problems and solutions.
William Huggins: The fifth Bruce medalist.
Thank you!
Chasing ghosts.
Shoemaker and morning star.
Bach, God, and the jungle.
Alive and well in Tsimanampetsotsa.
A seahorse father makes a good mother. (cover story)
Columbus, my enemy.
Bee cool.
Queuing to carol.
The universal mushroom.
Darwin and Paley Meet the Invisible Hand.
Pictures from an Expedition.
Battlefields of Ashes and Mud.
Degreening Vietnam.
Conservation by Conflict in Nicaragua.
Courting Disaster in Cannibal Territory. (cover story)
The Bonobos' Peaceable Kingdom.
The Target of a Victimless Hunt.
Enigmas of the small shellies.
Gaudineer Knob, West Virginia.
Bob Dylan and moas' ghosts.
Columbus the unwitting.
Starter homes for young lizards.
Wet behind the gills.
The hunters of Los Medaños.
A day with the dead. (cover story)
The real vampire.
Taraka's ghost.
A meeting with Mars.
Indecent exposure.
The Golden Rule--a proper scale for our environmental crisis.
Caught in the middle.
In the minds of monkeys.
The Ordeal of Moharram.
News notes.
Bring on the computers!
News notes.
News notes.
News notes.
The `Winning Words' science competition: Students write about science.
Corporal punishment: Used in a discriminatory manner?
Writing across the curriculum: Assignments and evaluation.
Footloose and fancy-free: Kicking the habit of conventional classroom furniture.
An examination of substitute teacher effectiveness.
Teaching in the tropics: A guide for the displaced Northerner.
How tracking restricts educational opportunity.
Studying teachers' values.
Being held responsible versus being responsible.
Speaking of morale.
Whole language: From philosophy to practice.
Computer applications: A schoolwide innovation.
Back in the classroom: Notes from a teacher educator.
Reshaping the secondary curriculum.
Small-group learning in the information age.
Learning style and equal protection: The next frontier.
Five years of Missouri school reform.
Discipline-based art education: Can it save art in our schools?
Implementing a one-year science-technology-society course.
Breaking the scheduling straitjacket.
Children with disabilities in the regular classroom.
The role of literature in reading achievement.
Invocations and the establishment clause: The use of different lenses.
Involving students in their own learning.
African-American males in middle school: One school's...
Promoting reading and writing in the middle-grade content...
Cooperative problem solving in Mathematics: Beginning the...
The principal's `voice': A bundle of contradictions.
Helping athletes excel in the classroom--and on the field.
The legal implications of canine searches.
Staffing secondary schools: A successful alternative...
Teachers' stories: An attempt at values integration.
Stress management for teachers: A practical approach.
Changing mathematics teaching.
Assessing character education: Paradigms, problems...
An at-risk assessment: Teachers rate their students on...
An essay: The charrette and long-range planning in the Virginia Community College System.
Factors contributing to job satisfaction and organizational commitment of community college...
One step beyond what the literature says on institutional effectiveness of community, junior and...
A new vision for student development services for the 90s.
Empirical implications for the training and professional development of community college...
The relationship between unionization and job satisfaction among two-year college faculty.
Trustee views on finance, governance, and educational issues.
Attending two-year college after attending a four-year university in Alberta, Canada.
Understanding and measuring the public's image of a community college.
Do underprepared students and those with lower academic skills belong in the community college?
Florida community colleges meet the challenge: Preparing students for minimum competency testing.
The twenty-first century executive leader.
The transformation of a community college.
Guaranteed student success: General education and occupational programs.
Thoughts on stress and college administration.
A focus on university faculty service to community colleges.
The American history curriculum in North Carolina's public community colleges and...
Placement scores and placement practices: An empirical analysis.
Challenging high school honor students with community college courses.
The future of private junior colleges: An ERIC review.
The National Council of State Directors of Community/Junior Colleges: The first 20 years.
Applied associate degree transfer phenomenon: Properties and publics.
Identifying ethnicity and gender from anonymous essays.
A comparison of attitudes toward tech-prep programs.
Community college student alcohol abuse: An assessment.
Bad news/good news: Collecting transfer data.
Changing teaching for a changing world: Implications of the knowledge explosion.
CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY SYSTEM AND FIRST AMENDMENT RIGHTS TO FREE SPEECH.
ACADEMIC FREEDOM: A MATTER OF INTERPRETATION.
ACADEMIC FREEDOM IS A PRIVILEGE THAT MUST NOT BE SUBORDINATED TO RELIGIOUS CONVICTIONS.
WHAT SCHOOL ADMINISTRATORS NEED TO KNOW ABOUT ACADEMIC FREEDOM.
ACADEMIC FREEDOM, THE FIRST AMENDMENT, AND STUDENTS' RIGHTS.
ACADEMIC FREEDOM IN THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
GEORGE MASON THE TRUE FATHER OF THE BILL OF RIGHTS IN THE U.S. CONSTITUTION.
FREEMASONRY'S CONTRIBUTION TO THE U.S. CONSTITUTION (ANDERSON'S CONSTITUTIONS OF 1723) A TWO-ACT PLAY (A TRUE STORY).
Academic department head as key university administrator.
The roles and responsibilities of departmental heads and chairpersons in schools of education as perceived by deans.
The perceived and expected roles and responsibilities of departmental chairpersons in schools of education as determined by teaching faculty.
Enhancing oral communication between teachers and students.
Promoting cognitive development through adult education.
Using scientific practice to increase scholarly activity among social work educators.
Teacher education & development of a proactive/reflective pre service program.
The relationship of teacher satisfaction to perceptions of school organization, teacher empowerment, work conditions, and community status.
American values: The ties that bind.
Suggestions for improving our public schools criticized.
Education in the Republic of Georgia, S.S.R.: Comparisons with America.
Teacher job satisfaction and teacher job stress: School size, age and teaching experience.
Restructuring elementary school science in-service education for improved teaching and learning.
Good teacher-student relationships: A key element in classroom motivation and management.
The relationship between journal writing in education and thinking processes what educators say about it.
An innovative approach to teaching oral communication: The center for excellence in oral communication.
Program assessment for a teacher education program.
Frequency with which tenured teachers are evaluated and quality of instruction.
Tracing the evolution of guided imagery theory in relation to health care.
Computer assisted and non-computer assisted career/life planning workshops for low-income women.
The role of Freemasonry in Mozart's humanism that served as a precursor to democracy.
KIDLINK: A model for multicultural and technological literacy.
Learning styles research: Implications for increasing students in teacher education programs.
Faculty qualifications and accreditation standards: The Southern Association of Colleges and...
Qualities exhibited by effective mathematics teachers: Perceptions of preservice and inservice...
Neuro-linguistic programming: Establishing rapport between the school counselor and the student.
Johnny can add, but really doesn't know his way around.
Transitions: Teachers moving into whole language.
Self-help books and clinical intervention.
If at first you don't succeed...
I think I can! I think I can! Self-evaluation of young children.
An Empirical Taxonomy of Critical Thinking.
Search for the excellent teacher and the emergence of the master teacher.
Experienced teachers' assessment of classroom management skills presented in a summer course.
Enhancing motivation using an instructional game.
The most frequently used remedial strategies reported by teachers of students with learning...
Multicultural appropriateness in institutionally-based writing assessment programs.
Future directions for the preparation of leisure and aging professionals.
Transition in reading instruction: From a skills acquisition to a whole language model.
Factor structure of the non-cognitive questionnaire for Black, Mexican American and White college...
Hemisphericity: A key to understanding individual differences among teachers and learners.
An experiment with student evaluations of teaching.
Contributions and applications of analytical psychology to education and child development.
Neuro-Linguistic Programming--gender and the learning modalities create inequalities in learning...
Remedial strategies used by special education teachers.
An education of the imagination: Expanding the world of children living in poverty.
Attributions and the implications of strategy in the attribution model.
An inside view of parent success in black families.
Promoting family literacy: An alternative intervention.
Testing is learning.
`Crack babies' in the classroom.
Surviving the first year of teaching: Lessons from New Zealand.
Identifying gifted and talented students.
The quest to find an alternative way to identify artistic talent in black students.
Patterns of academic achievement in students who qualified for a gifted program on the basis of...
Recognizing creative thinking talent in the classroom.
Developing a thinking skills component in the gifted education program.
We can agree after all! Achieving consensus for a critical thinking component of...
Attrition patterns in a summer program for gifted junior high students.
An investigation into the needs of gifted boys.
Underachieving gifted males: Are we missing the boat?
Changes in emotional resilience: Gifted adolescent boys.
Gender distribution in programs for the gifted.
The need for clarification in research designed to examine gender differences in achievement and...
Gifted high school students' attitudes towards careers and sex roles.
Moral development of the gifted: Making a case for children's literature.
Social leadership skills in young children.
Exploring the development of leadership giftedness.
Gifted leadership.
Current state practices in educating students who are gifted and talented.
Parental communication style and its influence on exceptional children's television viewing.
Identifying the gifted child humorist.
Minds in the making: A community resource program.
Children's rights in education: An historical perspective.
Expanding professional opportunities and improving the...
Intervention projects in school psychology at the...
School psychology training and the education of minority...
Training school psychologists for service delivery to...
Professional preparation of psychologists for family...
Retooling psychology to serve children and adolescents with...
State department and university cooperation: Evaluation of...
Preparation of school psychologists to serve as consultants...
Providing a continuum of professional training: The...
Meeting the needs of children and families: Opportunites...
The social maladjustment exclusion: Issues of definition...
Are teachers' perceptions of difficult-to-teach students...
Development of the teacher rating of academic achievement...
THE WINGLESS EROS OF SOCIALISM: NATIONALISM AND SEXUALITY IN HUNGARY.
THEORY, POLICY, AND THE NARODY SEVERA.
WE THINK, THEREFORE THEY ARE? ON OCCIDENTALIZING THE WORLD.
FINE MATS AND MONEY: CONTENDING EXCHANGE PARADIGMS IN COLONIAL SAMOA.
ELITE DISCOURSE OF THE MARKET AND NARRATIVE ETHNOGRAPHY.
THE FIESTA CYCLE OF "SPAIN"
NATIONALISM IN A LOCAL SETTING.
GENDER AND THE JAPANESE STATE: PENSION BENEFITS CREATING DIFFERENCE.
JAPANESE MOTHERS AND OBENToS: THE LUNCH-BOX AS IDEOLOGICAL STATE APPARATUS.
The soft infrastructure of a market economy.
The pursuit of happiness under socialism and capitalism.
Obstacles in the pursuit of happiness.
Economic and political perestroika.
Insulating economics from politics: Toward a constitution of liberty.
Revitalization of socialism or restoration of capitalism?
Economic reform: A great bubble or a faint chance to survive?
Transition and the privatization problem.
The law of the microcosm and the end of socialism.
Government intervention in health care markets and health care outcomes: Some international...
The dismal fate of Soviet-type economies: Mises was right.
The nondesignability of living systems: A lesson from the failed experiments in socialist countries.
The first and second Reich: The taming of an industrial-policy advocate.
The Federal Reserve chairman as hero: Our defense against monetary excesses?
Full privatization of currency in a nearly conventional money and banking system.
Welfare gains from innovation-induced rent seeking.
Political and economic changes in the USSR: Energy implications.
Environmental issues in the future development of the USSR...
Market barriers to energy-efficiency investments.
Horizontal oil and gas wells: The engineering and economic...
A risk analysis of oil development in the Arctic National...
Predicting the discoveries and finding costs of natural gas:...
Is the world oil market `one great pool'?
The value of commodity purchase contracts with limited price...
Manufacturing energy use in eight OECD countries: Trends...
Testing for barriers to energy conservation--an application...
The welfare impact of rising block pricing: Electricity in...
Onsite backup generation and interruption insurance for...
The trade-off between economic and environmental objectives in...
The impact of an oil market disruption on the price of oil: A...
Testing alternative hypotheses of oil producer behavior.
Limits on the economic effectiveness of a carbon tax.
The emperor of Japan as deity (kami).
The way of the ancestors: Custom, innovation, and resistance.
Redefining the `field' in fieldwork.
Tubers and tenrecs: The Mikea of southwestern Madagascar.
Noblesse oblige: A strategy for local boundary making.
Selako male initiation.
Celebrations of bureaucracy: Birthday parties in Israeli kindergartens.
Hegemony and the language of change: The pidginization of land tenure among the Managalese of...
An expression of cultural change: Invisible converts to Protestantism among highland Guatemala...
Skin color, race, and racism in Nicaragua.
Gender and caste in the Mandara highlands: Northeastern Nigeria and northern Cameroon.
Cuna long distance journeys: The results of colonial interaction.
TRENDS & FORCES: INFLUENCE OF IMMIGRATION, MIGRATION, AND ACCULTURATION ON THE FABRIC OF AGING IN AMERICA.
GERONTOLOGY AND THE RELEVANCE OF DIVERSITY.
Public Entitlements: Exclusionary Beneficence.
PSYCHOSOCIAL CORRELATES OF HEALTH AND ILLNESS AMONG MINORITY ELDERS.
The Health, Labor Force, and Retirement Experiences of Aging Minorities.
Generational Equity or Interdependence?
Young Latinos, Older Anglos, and Public Policy: Lessons from California.
Living Arrangements & Social Environment Among Ethnic Minority Elderly.
Politics, Diversity, and Minority Aging.
ETHNICITY, CRIME, & AGING: Risk Factors and Adaptation.
CAREGIVING AMONG RACIAL & ETHNIC MINORITY ELDERS.
Rural Minority Populations.
Creating Culturally Relevant Ways of Thinking About Diversity & Aging.
'Diversity Assessments' in Aging Services.
The old man as a creative artist in India.
Goya's Caprichos and creativity at midlife and beyond.
Creativity and life preview in the visual arts: The transformative experience of Florence...
FROM THE GREAT SOCIETY TO THE AGING SOCIETY--25 YEARS OF THE OLDER AMERICANS ACT.
THE EVOLUTION OF THE OLDER AMERICANS ACT: A 25-YEAR REVIEW OF THE LEGISLATIVE CHANGES.
An Agenda for the Nineties and Beyond.
OLDER WORKERS AND THE OLDER AMERICANS ACT.
Long-Term Care: On the Comeback Trail?
Housing for Older Americans: SUSTAINING THE DREAM.
COORDINATED, COMPREHENSIVE COMMUNITY CARE AND THE OLDER AMERICANS ACT.
Current Trends in Living Arrangements & Social Environment Among Ethnic Minority Elderly.
Familial Obligation: Issues for the 1990s.
Inclusive and Fair: The Case for Universality in Social Programs.
Ethnic Minority Elders and the Older Americans Act: How Have They Fared?
Giant American bamboo in the vernacular architecture of Colombia and Ecuador.
Weeds in Vermont as tokens of socioeconomic change.
Unification of Germany in 1990.
Global economy and port morphology in Belawan, Indonesia.
Settlement and agriculture on an ancient desert frontier.
The enigma of the destruction of Colhuw Port, Wales.
Classification and purpose in automated vegetation maps.
Place in advertising.
Cultural mediators or marginal persons?
Interpreting spatial patterns from the 1990 China census.
A working-class suburb for immigrants, Toronto 1909-1913.
Zonas de tolerancia on the northern Mexican border.
Colonial policy and subsistence in Tanganyika 1925-1945.
Tourism in the Northwest Territories.
Labor shortages and crop diversity in the southern Peruvian sierra.
A county that has gone downhill.
Local factors in changing land-tenure patterns.
Landslide control on North Island, New Zealand.
ELDER ABUSE.
NATIONAL HEALTH LINE.
BROADENING THE DEFINITION OF SCHOLARSHIP: PRACTICE AND ACTION RESEARCH.
AIDS, OLDER PEOPLE, AND SOCIAL WORK.
SOCIAL SUPPORT NETWORKS OF WHITE AND BLACK ELDERLY PEOPLE AT RISK FOR INSTITUTIONALIZATION.
INFORMAL HELPERS OF ELDERLY HOME CARE CLIENTS.
Kinesiology, the proper name for the discipline.
Student-athletes' perceptions of high school sports participation.
`Academic' vs. `physical' educational malpractice: Can relief be granted?
P.L. 99-457 and how it affects the special physical educator.
Labels and the attitudes of undergraduate physical education students toward disabled individuals.
Computer-assisted instruction vs. lecture methods in teaching the rules of golf.
The Physical Education Systematic Observation Program (PE-SOP): An application oriented...
Effects of self-efficacy treatments on curl-up scores of third graders.
A 1990 reassessment of Metheny's model of sport.
Identifying key result areas during the planning process: A technique for simplifying lesson...
The relationship between physical education teacher education program goals and cooperating...
Secondary student attitudes toward physical education.
Anatomy and physiology offerings in physical education professional preparation programs.
Gymnastics in Schools.
A dichotomy of purpose--the see-saw dilemma for graduate teaching assistants.
The teacher and student attitudes toward physical education.
Coaches of athletes with disabilities.
Influence of number of trials on performance of mentally retarded students on the shuttle run.
Opinions of participants and nonparticipants toward youth sport.
The organizational structure of amateur sport within the country of Mexico--five perspectives.
The Influence of Participation in Junior High Athletics on Students' Attitudes and Grades.
Philosophy and Officiating: Archetypes.
Utilizing the Games for Understanding Model at the Elementary School Level.
Effects of a Competency-Based Instruction on Kindergarten Children's Gross Motor Development.
Identifying Least Restrictive Environment Options in Physical Education.
Changing Preservice Teachers' Attitudes About Measurement and Evaluation in Physical Education.
Practical Suggestions For Implementing Nontraditional/Adventure Education into the High School Curriculum.
Computerized Information Management for HPERD Administrators.
Waste disposal: A miracle of immaculate consumption?
America's infant-mortality puzzle.
Language choice for Latino students.
Black and white at Stanford.
Growth economics vs. macroeconomics.
IQ and science: The mysterious Burt affair.
The Underclass and the Great Migration.
The Migrants' Tale and Ghetto Culture.
The new politics of the new poverty.
The moral environment of the poor.
It ain't what they teach, it's the way they teach it.
The great sharecropper success story.
Textbooks and tribalism in California.
The lessons of New York City.
One hundred years of antitrust.
How not to reform auto insurance.
Challenges to a school community.
Lessons from the Difficult Child: The impact of the severely emotionally disturbed child...
Facilitating independent mobility with an electrically powered wheelchair.
All the world's a stage--and we all go through them.
On the way to literacy: Early experiences for young visually impaired children.
Easing a blind student's transition to employment.
Is it the same?
Employment and rehabilitation services in the USSR for adults who are visually impaired.
Male-Male Sexual Contact in the U.S.A.: Findings from Five Sample Surveys, 1970-1990.
An Ethnography of HIV/AIDS and Sexuality in The People's Republic of China.
Methodological Considerations for Survey Research on Sexual Behavior: Urban African American and Hispanic Youth.
Voluntary Control of Penile Tumescence: Effects of an Incentive and a Signal Detection Task.
Sexual Behavior of Clients with Street Prostitutes in Camden, NJ.
NEW PERSPECTIVES IN SEXOLOGY: FROM RIGOR (MORTIS) TO RICHNESS.
Money and Currency.
Sovereignty, Identity, Sacrifice.
The Right to National Self-Determination.
Charisma and the Transformation of Grace in the Early Modern Era.
Women in "The Working Man's Paradise": Sole Parents, the Women's Movement, and the Social Policy Bargain in Australia.
Gender Politics and the Contradictions of Nurturance: Moral Authority and Constraints to Action for Female Abortion Activists.
Toward a Third Way: Women's Politics and Welfare Policies in Sweden.
The Context of Burke's Reflections.
Othering the Academy: Professionalism and Multiculturalism.
Representing Fundamentalism: The Problem of the Repugnant Cultural Other.
Quantitative aspects of the disengagement process of advanced and elite Greek male athletes from...
The effects of progressive relaxation, mental practice, and hypnosis on athletic performance: A...
A survey of elite athletes on the perceived causes of using banned drugs in sport.
Vocabulary and academic interest differences of athletes and nonathletes.
High school cross country runners: Running commitment, health locus of control and performance.
Career contingencies: Patterns of initial entry and continuity in collegiate sports officiating.
Practice behaviors of elite archers and their coaches.
Socialization experiences and level of terminating participation in sports.
A comparison of male and female university athletes and nonathletes on eating disorder indices...
A psycho-behavioral analysis of addicted versus non-addicted male and female exercisers.
Factors in withdrawal from youth sport: A proposed model.
Collusion in Major League Baseball: An empirical test.
The association between athletes' perceptions of their abilities on the influence of coach...
Gender differences in motivation for intercollegiate athletic participation.
Socialization into an avocational subculture.
International politics and judging in Olympic skating events: 1968-1988.
The effect on performance of being traded during the season: The case of the National Hockey League.
Attributional schema of players before and after knowledge of game outcome.
Collective foreign policy decision-making within SADCC: Do regional objectives alter national...
Lesotho: What will happen after apartheid goes?
Namibia after one year.
Cessation of Touareg repression: Respite or resolution?
Eritrean Self-determination Revisited.
Eritrea: The Socio-Economic Challenges of Independence.
Political Mobilization and Nationalist Movements: The Case of the Eritrean People's Liberation Front.
Eritrea and Ethiopia: Strategies for reconciliation in the Horn of Africa.
Environment and development in Eritrea.
Observations After Revisiting South Africa.
Japanese neomercantilism toward sub-Saharan Africa.
Pluralism and political change in Central Africa.
The right to education: An elusive quest for the youth in South Africa.
Notes on Ghana's current transition to constitutional rule.
The struggle over structural adjustment in Ghana.
Joe Appiah: A personal and political odyssey.
Peace in the Western Sahara?
Malawi and Mozambique: The human frontier.
Testing the usefulness of the corporatism model for Africa.
Manufacturing in Africa.
Mainstreams and side channels: The localization of immigrant cultures.
The tribal twenties: `Assimilated' Catholics' response to anti-Catholicism in the 1920s.
Ordering in bulk: Canada's postwar immigration policy and the recruitment of contract workers...
Celebrating five ethnic groups in Rhode Island history.
`Eny Kinde of Worke': A review essay on African-American migrations.
Gender and the `American way of life': Women in the Americanization movement.
The practice of medicine and prejudice in a New England town: The founding of Mount Sinai...
List upon list: The ship passenger records and immigration research.
Sin Frontreras?: Chicanos, Mexican Americans, and the emergence of the contemporary Mexican...
Selective service and Polish Army recruitment during World War I.
Immigrant women: Nowhere at home?
The long, long seventeenth century: A review essay.
The ethics of research in American Indian communities.
Commentary: Research, redskins, and reality.
The social causes of American Indian homicide as revealed by the life experiences of thirty...
The Southeast syndrome: A prior restraint of a non-event.
Out of the `Graves of the Polluted Debauches': The Boys of the Cherokee Male Seminary.
Termination and the eastern band of Cherokees.
`The woman who loved a snake' and `What People of Elem Saw: Orality in Mabel McKay's stories.
Sixteenth-century Tusayan.
Searching for structure: Reconstructing Crow family life during the reservation era.
The developmental cycle of Cheyenne polygyny.
From longhouse to loghouse: Household structure among the Senecas in 1900.
The little State Department: Hollywood and the State Department in the postwar world.
Ethnic politicians and American nationalism during the first World War: Four German-born members...
American sport history: A bibliographical guide.
The transformation of the `rags to riches' stories: Business biographies of success in the...
American journalism history: A bibliographic essay.
The concept and practice of individual rights in Nigeria, 1950-1966: How relevant is the American...
A review of slavery, emancipation and abolition in South Africa and the United States in the...
Promiscuity, emancipation, submission: The civilizing process and the establishment of a female...
Palestinians, Israelis, and the intifada: The third year and beyond.
Development under occupation?: The political economy of U.S. aid to the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Language and propaganda: Challenges to media interpretations of the Palestine question.
Prospects for democracy in Jordan.
U.S. Gulf Policy: Going the extra mile for war.
Iraq's conduct of the Gulf crisis: A critical assessment.
The Gulf States and the crisis over Kuwait.
Non-alignment and commitment in the Gulf conflicts: Palestine's policy.
From the Mediterranean to the Gulf and back again: The Palestinian Intifada and Gulf war.
Democratization in Southeast Asia.
Hong Kong, Macau, and the People's Republic of China: A David and Goliath relationship?
Japanese direct investment in the United States.
Benazir Bhutto: A political portrait.
A post-Gulf-War policy for the Middle East.
Resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict: An imperative for permanent peace in the Middle East.
Whose law? What order?
The post-Cold-War world order and the Gulf crisis.
Saudi Arabia's role in the Middle East: Regional stability within the new world order.
Taiwan's economic development and its relationship to the international environment.
Taiwan from an international perspective.
Taiwan's economic relations with mainland China.
Shaping Taiwan's future.
SELECTIVE GLOBAL COMMITMENT.
THE LIKUD VISION FOR ISRAEL AT PEACE.
IS DAMASCUS READY FOR PEACE?
NEW WORLD ORDER OR HOLLOW VICTORY?
DESERT STORM AND DETERRENCE.
THE SUMMER OF ARAB DISCONTENT.
JORDAN AND THE GULF CRISIS.
THE COMING OIL REVOLUTION.
AVOIDING WAR IN KASHMIR.
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS AND NATIONAL SECURITY.
GERMANY AND JAPAN: THE NEW CIVILIAN POWERS.
FRANCE IN THE NEW EUROPE.
EAST-CENTRAL EUROPE: THE MORNING AFTER.
THE NEW SOVIET PLAN.
COMMUNISM IN RUSSIAN HISTORY.
The Bush administration and Latin America: The pragmatic style and the regionalist option.
Mision cumplida? Civil military relations and the Chilean political transition.
Politicized democracy: Competition, institutions, and `civic fatigue' in Brazil.
Argentina: Deepening alignment with the West.
Peru's black market in foreign exchange.
Mexico's foreign policy in 1990: Electoral sovereignty and integration with the United States.
The Rio group: Decline or consolidation of the Latin American concertacion policy?
State, market and neoliberalism in post-transition Argentina: The Menem experiment.
Military politics and counter-insurgency in Peru.
Income distribution and the Enterprise of the Americas Initiative.
The senior citizen's tea. (cover story)
Fourth graders use historical documents and learn citizenship and global awareness.
Taking advantage of murder and mayhem for Social Studies.
Cashing in on students' interest in money.
Discovering the historian's voice: Interesting students in historical subjectivity.
Reconstruction historiography: A source of teaching ideas.
Teaching about landlord-tenant law: Activities for the classroom.
Reflections on the `New Social Studies.'
A problem of graphics.
Advanced placement U.S. history.
Where in Western Europe would you like to live?
Using informal writing in large history classes.
New worlds from old.
Hungary's young people consider America's Bill of Rights.
Bringing the Bill of Rights to the classroom.
The 4th R: The Bill of Rights for Young Children.
Teaching the Bill of Rights in secondary schools.
Suggested sources for teaching about the Bill of Rights.
Add spark and sizzle to middle school social studies.
The need for a Center for Public Integrity.
Indian season in American schools.
A Thanksgiving quiz.
Classroom drama.
Has the time come to revive energy education?
The illustrated song slide show as a middle school history activity.
Teaching history through analytical and reflective thinking skills.
Develop social responsibility by having social studies and home economics departments collaborate.
A new organizational approach to use with middle-school readers.
First word.
Contemporary African art symposium at the Studio Museum in Harlem.
Recollections of Arnold Rubin.
Is there history in horizontal masks? A preliminary response to the dilemma of form.
Who commissioned the Queen Mother Tusks? A problem in the chronology of Benin ivories.
The recovery of a Benin bronze head.
On artifact and identity at the Niger-Benue confluence.
Prestige ornaments.
Self-decoration and religious power in Dangme culture.
Completing the circle.
First word.
Old pictures, new approaches. (cover story)
Fantasia of the Phototheque. (cover story)
Missionary photography. (cover story)
Documenting the cultures of Southern Zaire. (cover story)
The spectacle of Africa through the lens of Herbert Lang. (cover story)
The mosaic glass vessels from Hasanlu, Iran: A study in large-scale stylistic trait distribution.
A crusading fresco cycle at the Cathedral of Le Puy.
Alfred Rethel's counterrevolutionary death dance.
Impressionist installations and private exhibitions.
The patron and the pirate: The mystery of Memling's Gdansk Last Judgment.
Rhetoric and art history in the Italian Renaissance and Baroque.
Constantijn Huygens and Susanna van Baerle: A hitherto unkown portrait.
THE POEMA DEL CID AND THE POTENTIALITIES OF METONYMY.
VARGAS LLOSA'S PARROT.
SOCIAL REALISM AND THE CONTINGENCIES OF HISTORY IN THECONTEMPORARY SPANISH NOVEL.
INTERIOR TEXTS IN EL AMOR EN LOS TIEMPOS DEL CÓLERA.
THE POLITICS OF LOPE'S FUENTEOVEJUNA.
NOSTALGIA AND THE POPULARITY OF DON JUAN TENORIO: READING ZORRILLA THROUGH CLARÍN.
WOMEN RIDDLERS IN HISPANIC FOLKLORE AND LITERATURE.
Class-bound reductionism vs. the multidetermination of national cultures: An essay on Puerto...
Cinema novo and the question of the popular.
Latinismo and ethnic nationalism in cultural performance.
Urban space and music in the formation of youth cultures: The case of Bogota, 1920-1980.
Tango to folk: Hegemony construction and popular identities in Argentina.
Os Blocos de Santa Rita do Sapucai: Carnival clubs in a small Brazilian city: More than culture...
Culture and communications policy in a colonial context: The case of cable television in Puerto...
Andean voices on Lima airwaves: Highland migrants and radio broadcasting in Peru.
The reception of telenovelas and other Latin American genres in the regional market: The case of...
Words and silences in Uruguayan canto popular [popular song].
Social semiosis and authoritarian legitimacy: Television in Pinochet's Chile.
Technology for teaching.
The MENC adviser.
Working toward solutions in mainstreaming.
Beyond mainstreaming.
Managing the mainstreamed classroom.
Collaboration for learning.
A tradition of progress.
Unveiling the mysteries of musical spontaneity.
MMCP and today's curriculum.
Speaking the musical language.
Growing with improvisation.
Improvising jazz.
Reality...101.
Idea bank.
Technology for teaching.
Designing curricula based on the standards.
Two rules for professional conduct.
The MENC adviser.
Collegiate perspective.
Creativity as creative thinking.
What is creativity? What is it not?
Structuring the music curriculum for creative learning.
Strategies for fostering creative thinking.
Crossculture perspectives of musical creativity.
Tools and environments for musical creativity.
Bulletin board.
Music, at-risk students, and the missing piece.
Learning styles of at-risk students.
Encouraging musical risks for learning success.
Read between the lines.
Music class for the at-risk.
The MENC adviser.
Cooperating teachers.
A book of many uncertainties: Joyce's Dubliners.
Cliches and repetition in Dubliners: The example of `A Little Cloud'.
The geometry of meaning in Dubliners: A Euclidian approach.
Titles in Dubliners.
No cheer for the `gratefully oppressed' in Joyce's Dubliners.
Language, character, and gender in the direct discourse of Dubliners.
`The Sisters' and the Inferno: An intertextual network.
`A very fine piece of writing': An etymological, Dantean, and Gnostic reading of Joyce's...
Recent work in critical theory.
The state of play and interplay in intertextuality.
MEREZHKOVSKY AND BERDYAEV: LEONARDO AND THE MEANING OF THE CREATIVE ACT.
KAZANTZAKIS'S THE ROCK GARDEN: JAPAN CHINA REVISITED.
NARRATIVE AND ITS ITINERARY IN JEAN LORRAIN'S LE VICE ERRANT.
EL BESO DE LA MUJER ARAÑA: NORM AND DEVIANCE IN THE FICTION/AS THE FICTION.
THE MARGINS OF ROMANCE: ART AND ARTIFICE IN JOUFROI DE POITIERS.
THE SYMBOL'S SYMBOL: SPIDER WEBS IN FRENCH LITERATURE.
A WOMAN'S TIME, A LADY'S PLACE: NANA AND AU BONHEUR DES DAMES.
Welcome.
Setting the stage.
Speakers at the Canada-U.S. Law Institute Conference on the Law and .
The challenge of the F.T.A.--Chapter 19.
The challenge of the F.T.A.--Chapter 19.
New elements in the anti-dumping equation: Implementing the GATT Uruguay Round, U.S.-Mexico free...
Discussion after the speeches of Jonathan T. Fried, William S. Merkin and William H. Cavitt.
The business perspective: Cross border views.
The business perspective: Cross border views.
The business perspective: Cross border views.
The business perspective: Cross border views.
Discussion after the speeches of William G. Deeks, Neil W. Zundel, Roger Phillips, Robert L...
The legal perspective: Anti-dumping remedies and competition regimes, similarities and differences.
Competition (antitrust) and antidumping laws in the context of the Canada-U.S. free trade agreement.
Competition (antitrust) and antidumping laws in the context of the Canada-United States Free...
Speakers at the Canada-U.S. Law Institute Conference on Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement...
The legal perspective: Anti-dumping remedies and competition regimes, similarities and differences.
The government perspective: Effects upon present competition policy.
The government perspective: Effects upon present competition policy.
Conference opening.
The current context: Where do we stand--internationally and domestically?
Sea level rise and coastal wetlands: Opportunities for a peaceful migration.
NEPA in the domain of federal Indian policy: Social knowledge and the negotiation of meaning.
Contribution, contribution protection, and nonsettlor liability under CERCLA: Following Laskin's...
A dual track for incidental takings: Reexamining Sections 7 and 10 of the Endangered Species Act.
Title VI of the 1990 Clean Air Act amendments and state and local initiatives to reverse the...
Political coalitions, economic choices.
Weber, Trotsky and Holmes on the study of Leninist regimes.
Nationalism and the national minorities in East and Central Europe.
Constitutional developments in East Central Europe.
Elements of a new European security order.
Pan-European security: A Soviet scholar's view.
A more European Germany, a more German Europe.
The politics of economic transformation.
The lessons of economic reform: The Polish case.
The East European journalist.
Remaking the political field in Hungary: From the politics of confrontation to the politics of...
Privatization in Poland: The problem of valuation.
ECO '92: Critical challenges and global solutions.
John Stuart Mill and the middle road for American constitutional jurisprudence.
The end of ideology and the decay of politics.
The introduction of Montaigne's politics.
Feature review.
Liberal education and citizenship.
A realist response to the appeal for pacifism.
Understanding the dimensions of terrorism.
The Great Books and politics.
Liberty and community: A liberal resolution.
Kenneth Branagh's Henry V.
N.A. Berdyaev.
The political thought of the framers: Ambiguities and interpretations.
With Smersh in Berlin: New light on the incomplete histories of the Fuhrer and the Vozhd'.
The illogic of American arms control dogma: Lessons from the Carter and Bush experiences.
European public opinion and the Maastricht Treaty.
The limits of Arab democracy.
A western response to Halal Khashan.
Beyond Tiananmen Square: China and the MFN debate.
Government of El Salvador-FMLN peace agreements, 16 January 1992.
Reuniting German higher education and research.
The merciless steamroller.
Architecture.
The New York Times and the Moscow Show trials.
The use of force in the law of nations.
First report on the sixth IAEA on-site inspection in Iraq under Security Council Resolution 687...
High risk of HIV-1 infection for first-born twins.
Stressful life events and Graves' disease.
Obstructive sleep apnoea in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy: Effects of continuous positive...
Rapid genetic analysis of families with polycystic kidney disease 1 by means of a microsatellite...
First-pass metabolism of cyclosporin by the gut.
Uveitis: Pathogenesis.
Uveitis: Management.
Comparison of computer-aided and human review of general practitioners' management of hypertension.
Occupational risk for hepatitis C virus infection among New York City dentists.
Plasma endothelin during upright tilt: Relevance for orthostatic hypotension?
Correction of endothelial dysfunction in coronary microcirculation of hypercholesterolaemic...
Association of demyelination with deficiency of cerebrospinal-fluid S-adenosylmethionine in...
Inhibition of nitric oxide synthesis in septic shock: How much is beneficial?
Chirality in antiheumatic drugs.
Ultrasound screening of newborn urinary tract.
Dr Gilbert's magnetism.
Influence of platelet size on outcome after myocardial infarction.
Ultrasonic velocimetry of the fetal ductus venosus.
Newly discovered mycoplasma isolated from patients infected with HIV.
Prevention of ultraviolet-light-induced herpes labialis by sunscreen.
Computer-based knowledge systems.
Impact of psychiatric services on prison suicide.
Uremia: Is urea more important than we think?
Incentives for organ donation?
Swedish Aspirin Low-dose Trial (SALT) of 75 mg aspirin as secondary prophylaxis after...
Serologic markers and HLA genes among healthy first-degree relatives of patients with coeliac...
Rapid diagnosis of hantavirus disease with an IgG-avidity assay.
p53 mutation in hepatocellular carcinoma after aflatoxin exposure.
Use and sources of medical knowledge.
Adaptive control of functional neuromuscular stimulation-induced knee extension exercise.
Acute hemodynamic responses of spinal cord injured individuals to functional neuromuscular...
Musculoskeletal responses of spinal cord injured individuals to functional neuromuscular...
Erythema and skin temperature following continuous sitting in spinal cord injured individuals.
Thirty-minute continuous sitting force measurements with different support surfaces in the spinal...
An interactive computer graphics system for the design of molded and orthopedic shoe lasts.
Walking reeducation with partial relief of body weight in rehabilitation of patients with...
A method of assessing the efficacy of memory rehabilitation techniques using a `real-world'...
The initiation of gait in lower limb amputees: Some related data.
Effect on gait using various prosthetic ankle-foot devices.
Compressive strength mapping of femoral head trabecular bone.
Patient and staff acceptance of robotic technology in occupational therapy: A pilot study.
Analysis of a below-knee patellar tendon-bearing prosthesis: A finite element study.
Ankle-foot prosthesis with articulated human bone endoskeleton: Force-deflection and fatigue study.
Equipment and methods for laboratory testing of ankle-foot prostheses as exemplified by the...
Factors influencing rehabilitation of arteriosclerotic lower limb amputees.
Dynamic characteristics of a sport wheelchair.
A technique for the determination of center of gravity and rolling resistance for tilt-seat...
Experiments in the application of isolated-word recognition to secondary driving controls for the...
Development and testing of artificial low-frequency speech codes.
What shall we defend?
Historical scholarship and practical judgment.
History and politics: A common fate.
A letter to a Soviet historian.
A letter to Robert Conquest.
Can scholarship survive the scholars?
America: Multiethnic, not multicultural.
Roll over Aristotle: Martin Bernal and his critics.
Nietzsche, the Apaches, and Stanford: The hidden agenda of education for difference.
Higher education confronts the `new demographics'.
The importance of Karl Popper.
Filler feminism in high school history.
Inside the politicized classroom: A student's account of a seminar on Indian treaty rights.
An alumnus learns how might makes right at Bowdoin.
The nomination of Carol Iannone.
Retaking departments.
Montaigne.
Scientific fraud.
Men blow kisses to calves.
Tennis days.
Civility.
A life of learning.
Michael Oakeshott 1901-1990.
Schumpeter ascending.
Whatever was hidden.
The suttee romance.
Larkin's desolate attics.
Cinematic election and theological vanity.
Rome's other population.
`Wakefield' by Nathaniel Hawthorne: A story.
My Montparnasse.
Scientific realism and literary representation.
Andre Levinson and the making of a classical dance esthetic.
The politics of knowledge.
Higher education and group thinking.
Looking at obstacles.
When should religious leaders face liability for defamation?
Truth telling in Eastern Europe: The liberation and the burden.
The Supreme Court, fundamentalist logic, and the term `religion'.
Chaplains in the Confederate Army.
The creationist-evolutionist debate and the public schools.
The battle for Blue Lake: A struggle for Indian religious rights.
Notes on church-state affairs: United States.
The anti-democratic impulse in Catholicism: Jacques Maritain, Ives Simon, and Charles de Gaulle...
Enforcement of religious courts' judgments under Israeli law.
Sabbatarian accommodation in the Supreme Court.
`Myth of Origin,' civil religion and presidential politics.
Evangelicals and the Becker Amendment: A lesson in church-state moderation.
Interreligious dialogue and commitment.
`Dances with Wolves'.
God's action in the world.
Theological lessons from cosmology: Two case studies.
Armenian genocide and Christian existence.
Walter Benjamin and the angel of history.
Polanyi: An occasion of thanks.
Ethical responsibility and Third World Debt.
Bakhtin on world and spirit: The religiosity of...
The sacramentality of metaphors: Reflections on homosexuality.
Russian Jews: A hundred years in search of a self.
When the unclean spirit leaves.
Cornel West's new pragmatism.
A lament for the vanishing.
Anticipating the consequences of social behavior.
Early integration of context during lexical access of homonym meanings.
The impact of socially projected group composition on behavior in a commons dilemma: A self...
The illusion of certainty: A catastrophe model of decision framing.
Behavioral sequelae of exposure to higher power microwave fields.
The equivocal meanings of time: Exploratory and structural analyses.
Quality of life and affect in older persons: Hope, time frames, and training effects.
The Differential Aptitude Test (Language Usage and Spelling): A clinical study of computerized form.
When prosocial behavior becomes altruistic: An attributional analysis.
Orientations to conflict: Gender, attributions, resolution strategies, and self-monitoring.
Central issue importance as a function of gender and ethnicity.
Memory, emotional processing, and anxiety: A critique.
Impression management, cognitive demand, and interpersonal sensitivity.
Effects of interpolated processing on experts' recall of schematic information.
Massed versus distributed exposure and imaging of faces: Changing the test view.
Maintenance of mother-child aversive relationships: A fresh look at an old controversy.
Food-related stimuli increase desire to eat in hungry and satiated human subjects.
Faking personality questionnaires: A response to Furnham.
Heraclitus and Plato on the language of the real.
Heraclitus on living and dying.
Knowledge and unity in Heraclitus.
Appearance and reality in Heraclitus' philosophy.
Heraclitean satiety and Aristotelian actuality.
Heraclitus' and Wittgenstein's river images: Stepping...
Heraclitus: The postmodern presocratic?
Barbarian psyche in Heraclitus.
The witness in Heraclitus and in early Greek law.
Change is not doom.
Toward a psychology of sustainability.
Ecofeminism: Our roots and flowering.
Creating a sustainable future.
Toward an ecological psychology.
Inventing a psychology of our relationship to earth.
Blowing the Western mind--an essay.
Steiner's anthroposophy and Whitehead's philosophy.
John Dewey's project for `saving the appearances': Exploring some of its implications for...
Rudolf Steiner's activist epistemology and its relation to feminist thought in America.
William James and Rudolf Steiner.
Josiah Royce and Rudolf Steiner: A comparison and contrast.
Ecocentrism and the anthropocentric detour.
Come Holy Spirit, renew the whole creation: Seventh Assembly of the World Council of Churches.
The Council of Constantinople II as a model reconciliation council.
Theology, philosophy, and the natural sciences.
The nature of doctrine and scientific progress.
Organizing the people of God: Social-science theories of organization in ecclesiology.
Faith, contract, and sacrament in Christian marriage: A theological approach.
Theology as rhetoric.
Cyril of Jerusalem's use of Scripture in catechesis.
Instrumentum Divinitatis in Thomas Aquinas: Recovering the divinity of Christ.
Reviving Adamic adoptionism: The example of John Macquarrie.
The People's Liberation Army and China's Crisis.
Israel's Small War: The Military Response to the Intifada.
CFE II: A Quest for Stability.
Military Professionalism, Education, and Political Behavior in Mexico.
Profile of a Citizen Army: Shiloh's Soldiers.
Retention of Junior Enlisted Soldiers in the All-Volunteer Army Reserve.
Congress and the Politics of Military Reform.
Revising the War Powers Act.
From Professional to Political: The Redecline of the Lebanese Army.
El Salvador: The Military and Politics.
Environmental Implications of the Single European Market.
Clearing the Air Environmental Reform in MEXICO.
Chemical Hazards and the Public's RIGHT TO KNOW.
Integrated Catchment Management: The Western Australian Experience.
Debating Gaia. (cover story)
A framework for reshaping water management.
Fueling our global future.
Our Changing Planet: The FY 1990 Research Plan The U.S. Global Change Research Program/Our Changing Planet: The FY 1991 U.S. Global Change Research Program.
Air-Traffic Emissions.
Biological Treatment of Hazardous Wastes.
THE FOLLY AT FOLLY BEACH and Other Failings of U.S. Coastal Erosion Policy.
OBSTACLES and OPPORTUNITIES for a CONSUMER ECOLABEL.
The Federal Research Puzzle.
The impact of expert system usage on experiential learning in an auditing setting.
Accounting Information System Selection in Small Organizations: Incongruences Between Accounting Professionals.
Assessing Intangible Costs and Benefits in the Systems Decision Via Option Pricing Theory.
An MIS Data Quality Methodology Based on Optimal Error Detection.
Factors Influencing Software Piracy: Implications for Accountants.
Accounting and Business Data Communications.
Information System Development: Four Process Scenarios With Case Studies.
A demographic profile of participants in two Gulf of Mexico...
Simulated economic impact of TED regulations on selected...
The by-catch from the artisanal shrimp trawl fishery, Gulf...
Construction and operation of a two-place diver's sled.
Maturity and fecundity in the rockfishes, Sebastes spp...
Restricted access vs. open access methods of management:...
Pacific salmon, oncorhynchus spp., and the definition of...
Biographic memoir of Ernest Ingersoll: Naturalist,...
Population biology and life history of the North American...
Overview of Mark-recovery studies on Adult and Juvenile...
The Atlantic and Gulf menhaden purse seine fisheries:...
New products and markets for Menhaden, Brevoortia spp.
Assessment and management of Atlantic and Gulf Menhaden...
Discovering the invisible universe. (cover story)
A funny thing happened on the way to the Stanford Press...
Edward C. Pickering: The seventh Bruce medalist.
God's turnstile: The work of John Wheeler and Stephen Hawking.
Starry, starry night: Observing on Kitt Peak.
103rd annual meeting in Laramie.
Two years in Hollywood: An astronomer in television land. (cover story)
The wave of the future: Searching for gravity waves. (cover story)
Problems with pulsars.
The sun: A star close up. (cover story)
The solar chimes: Searching for oscillations inside the sun.
Computer software in astronomy.
Along the milky way.
Bruce medalist profiles: Oskar Backlund.
The 1991 A.S.P. award winners.
The exploration of Venus: A Magellan progress report. (cover story)
Jacobus Cornelius Kapteyn: The tenth Bruce medalist.
The great molecule factory in Orion.
Pearl Harbor & the emperor's physiologists.
The smoking gun of eugenics.
Buffalo Beats, Ohio.
Saint George and John Canoe.
Life styles of the huge and famous. (cover story)
Barosaurus on Central Park West. (cover story)
This bug's for you.
The cold facts of winter.
How to bear gifts.
Report from Oxford.
The owl, shield, and flint blade.
Fall in the House of Ussher.
Pilgrim's paradox.
Post Office Bay, Florida.
Weasel roulette. (cover story)
A confusion of cockatoos.
The ape that was.
The Arizona revisited.
The universal penitential fish.
Trickster treats.
The moral state of Tahiti--and of Darwin.
The saltshaker's curse.
Lords of the lek. (cover story)
Masks of the ancestors.
Underground potlatch.
Coming of age in the Ituri.
Why jellyfish stick together.
America's ancient mariners.
Epiphytes of El Yunque, Puerto Rico.
Miami's Caribbean boom.
Unenchanted evening.
A far plateau.
World of the living dead.
And the band played on.
Dim forest, bright chimps.
Sex for a song (dinner included).
News notes.
News notes.
News notes.
Restructuring schools: Will there be a place for women?
`Finding psychic rewards in today's schools': A rebuttal.
Putting the attendance policy to the test.
AIDS-related knowledge, attitudes, and belief of learning ...
Examining school choice issues.
Eight myths about school choice.
What's really at stake in the school choice debate?
Magnet schools and issues of education quality.
The constitutionality of choice under the establishment clause.
Which choice? Whose choice?
Involving veteran teachers in a state induction program.
Math instructional strategies for the discouraged learner.
Meeting individual needs: A learning styles success story.
Developing conceptual thinking: The concept attainment model.
Learning style characteristics: An introductory workshop.
Physical education: Part of the learning process.
How teachers can change the status quo.
Some common sense about statewide testing programs.
Unit resource notebooks put teachers in a bind(er).
Mentoring as professional development: From theory to practice.
High school seniors tell why they are `stressed out'
Media distortion of the teacher image.
Gifted behaviors-- excellence for all.
Using the proficient reader protocol to evaluate middle...
Co-authoring: A natural form of cooperative learning.
Metacognition: Developing independence in learning.
Perceptions of regular education teachers toward inclusion...
Valley Forge National Park.
Valley Forge as the cradle of democracy with Freemasonry as the integrating force (a truly most...
Hessians in the Revolutionary War.
A guidance and counseling needs assessment for a rural, multi-cultural K-8 school.
A collaborative model for teacher induction.
Fourth, fifth and sixth grade teachers' utilization and evaluation of interpersonal teaching...
The multiplicity of factors creating stress during the teaching practicum: The student teachers'...
Constructive feedback on teaching is missing.
The feedback loop.
Productivity: Improving the educational system over time.
A district's response to its audit report.
Curriculum auditing: Effects upon school improvement in international schools.
Curriculum control--after an educational performance audit, are you really finished?
Applying the quality fit framework to the curriculum management audit.
A look at the curriculum management audit applying Dr. Deming's principles for system transformation
Permanent educational reform: Individually guided education.
American and Chinese schools: A comparative analysis.
The problem with college-track high schools.
Quality curriculum for the brain.
Who's been planning my curriculum?
Active involvement in the higher education curriculum.
Introducing multimedia into the curriculum: A case study.
Business involvement in the schools: How and where do parents fit into the process.
An inservice model to impact life science classroom practice: Part one.
The role of the principal in parent conferencing.
Productivity and evaluation in education.
Administration of corporal punishment: Where are the procedural safeguards?
Teacher (oh so true) isms.
Activity patterns of children during non-school hours.
Identifying high risk children transferring into elementary schools.
Universal course requirements: Some thoughts regarding higher education.
Philosophy of education and the mathematics curriculum.
Cooperative activities to assist in the integration of students with disabilities.
Two sixth grade homework policies and their effect on the prompt return of completed homework...
The Diagnostic Index as a tool for improving screening of at risk preschool children.
Direct instruction can produce critical thinking in mathematics.
Using `Quality School' procedures to enhance student enthusiasm and student performance.
Effect of loss of father through divorce on personality of the preschool child.
Effects of intensive short-term remediation on academic intrinsic motivation of `at-risk' children.
Snell Educator Effectiveness Index: An instrument for faculty evaluation by students.
Parent expectations of Egyptian children.
The action-theoretical approach in educational psychology.
Issues in developmentally appropriate practice and individual differences.
Factors that influence students' decisions to attend college.
Causes and effects of low morale among secondary teachers.
Do teachers who know students better teach more?
Groupthink and the classroom: Changing familiar patterns to encourage critical thought.
Implementation of Project RIDE: Responding to individual differences in education.
Incentive contingencies, motivation, and performance in a visual learning task.
Attitudes toward research-based effective teaching behaviors.
Professional development: Problems and solutions.
Effects of evaluative quizzes on test performance.
Analysis of objective data used in the Masonic Youth Drug Abuse Prevention Program.
Principals and teachers unite: A team approach to supervision and evaluation.
Ritalin: What educators and parents should know!
The classroom as the center of inquiry.
Perceptions of the teaching profession and educational reform.
`Tall' school organization: A negative factor in teacher/principal empowerment.
Effects of interactive videodisc instruction on learner performance, learner attitude and...
Helping individuals with dyslexia succeed in adulthood: Emerging keys for effective parenting...
The use of self-talk to enhance children's writing.
Self-contained versus resource room classroom placement on the achievement of mildly mentally...
Reflections and impressions on education in China.
Gifted education in China.
Radical acceleration in the People's Republic of China: Early entrance to university.
The needs assessment--who needs it?
REDSIL: A forth generation evaluation model for gifted education programs.
A parent evaluation of a public preschool gifted program.
Multidimensional assessment of the gifted minority student.
Television and gifted children: What the research says.
Teaching critical television viewing: An approach for gifted learners.
Programs for the gifted in a state without a mandate: An `endangered species?'.
Self-regulated learning in gifted students.
Physiological uniqueness: A new perspective on the learning disabled/gifted child.
Fitting a square peg into a round hole.
Experience of giftedness `eight great gripes' six years later.
Parents vs. theorists: Dealing with the exceptionally gifted.
Exploring social and emotional aspects of giftedness in children.
Psychological intensities in gifted adults.
Stanford-Binet IV, of course! Time marches on!
The case for the Stanford-Binet L-M as a supplemental test.
Recent doctoral dissertation research on gifted.
The relationship between metacognition and problem solving in gifted children.
Course selection and performance of very high ability students: Is there a gender gap?
Social skills and learning disabilities: Causal, concomitant, or correlational?
Psychosocial dimensions of learning disability subtypes: Neuropsychological studies in the...
Social functioning in adults with learning disabilities.
Social performance of individuals with learning disabilities: Through the looking glass of...
Issues and problems in the influence of culture on the psychoeducational needs of...
Intellectual assessment of children from culturally diverse backgrounds.
Psychoeducational adjustment of English-speaking Caribbean and Central American immigrant...
Cooperative learning: A case for African-American students.
African-American children and the educational process: Alleviating cultural discontinuity through...
Implications for school psychologists: Synthesis of the mini-series.
Multicultural training in school psychology: A national survey.
Accountability practices of school psychologists: 1991 national survey.
Acceptability of behavioral treatments for children: Analog and naturalistic evaluation by parents.
Effects of curriculum-test overlap on standardized achievement test scores: Identifying...
FOOD RULES IN THE UNITED STATES: INDIVIDUALISM, CONTROL, AND HIERARCHY.
GENDER INEQUALITY AND RESISTANCE: THE CASE OF PORTUGUESE WOMEN IN LONDON.
BREAD AND WORK: PELLAGRA AND ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION IN TURN-OF-THE-CENTURY ITALY.
FIVE WOMEN NEGOTIATING THE MEANING OF NEGOTIATION.
A QUESTION OF LOYALTY: NATIONAL AND REGIONAL IDENTITY IN NARRATIVES OF APPALACHIA.
THE TAXIDERMY OF BIOLUMINESCENCE: TRACKING "NEIGHBORING" PRACTICES IN THE COAL-CAMPS OF WEST VIRGINIA.
CONTESTED LIVELIHOODS: "PLACING" ONE ANOTHER IN "CEDAR," KENTUCKY.
LET THE GIRLS DO THE SPELLING AND DAN WILL DO THE SHOOTING: LITERACY, THE DIVISION OF LABOR, AND IDENTITY IN A RURAL APPALACHIAN COMMUNITY.
ENGENDERING IDENTITY(S) IN A RURAL ARKANSAS OZARK COMMUNITY.
THE BOYCOTT IN THE IRISH CIVILIZING PROCESS.
ST. GERARD'S WRATH: RELIGIOUS POWER POLITICS IN A DUTCH COMMUNITY.
TACTICAL FACTORS IN THE SPANISH CONQUEST OF THE AZTECS.
A post-apartheid constitution for South Africa: Lessons from public choice.
Environmental problems under socialism.
The political economy of mandated spending.
Reforming the Bonneville Power Administration.
Morality and monopoly: The constitutional political economy of religious rules.
Benefits of minimal land-use regulations in developing countries.
Trade barriers in the theory of instrument choice.
Government and recycling: Are we promoting waste?
Why has the labor-managed firm failed.
The search for macroeconomic stability: Comment on Sumner.
Index future convertibility: Reply to Woolsey.
A tough pump to prime.
Karl Brunner: In memoriam.
Money, macroeconomics, and forecasting.
The art of forecasting: From ancient to modern times.
Governance, economy, and foreign aid.
City and countryside in the onset of Brazilian industrialization.
Changing development models in small economies: The case of Jamaica from the 1950s to the 1990s.
Surprises and secrets: Lessons from the 1990 Nicaraguan election.
Financial mobilization and allocation: The South Korean case.
Dilemmas and choices in educational policies: The case of South Korea and Taiwan.
International assistance and democracy: Assessing efforts to assist post-communist development.
Impacts of the Gulf War and changes in Eastern Europe.
Development risks and petroleum fiscal systems: A Comparative...
Prospects for natural gas in Western Europe.
Common carriage and the pricing of electricity transmission.
Developing futures markets for electricity in Europe.
Energy intervention after Desert Storm: Some unfinished tasks.
Cuba's transition to market-based energy prices.
What does a negawatt really cost? Evidence from utility...
Price and cost impacts of utility DSM programs.
Multiple energy supply risks, optimal reserves, and...
The Khazzoom-Brookes postulate and neoclassical growth.
Energy demand with flexible double-logarithmic functional...
The application of the Divisia index to the decomposition...
Imperfect price-reversibility of U.S. gasoline demand:...
Estimating disaggregated price elasticities in industrial...
Great Grandfather Jayakody's children: Local history and national politics in Sri Lanka.
Amish factionalism and technological change: A case study of kerosene refrigerators and...
Polyphony in the courts: Child custody cases in Kabba district court, 1925-1979.
Marriage, land, and kinship in a Nzema village.
Households and villages: The political-ritual structures of Tai communities.
Alliance through the circulation of men: A system of name-assigned residence.
Ritual, habitus, and hierarchy in Fiji.
When horticulturalists are like hunter-gatherers: The Sawiyano of Papua New Guinea.
Chinese funerals and Chinese ethnicity in Chiang Mai, Thailand.
Maize as a culinary mystery.
The politics of female identity: Warlpiri widows at Yuendumu.
Disputed boundaries: Tuareg discourse on class and ethnicity.
Women and politics: Comparative evidence from the northwest coast.
Biological theories of aging.
Biomarkers of aging.
Tools for aging research.
Geographical diffusion and calendrics in pre-Columbian Mesoamerica.
Amazonia and the politics of geopolitics.
Geography, empire, and environmental determinism.
Regions, semple, and structuration.
An application of graphical analysis to semidesert soils.
An evaluation of the average annual global water balance.
Creating trading places on the new Mexican frontier.
Denver's aging commercial strip.
National integration in China and Indonesia.
Street names in colonial Singapore.
Food-place associations on American product labels.
Looking for Columbus.
Black districts in Southeastern Florida.
The compound in post-apartheid South Africa.
Drought hazard in Morocco.
Prickly pear menace in Eastern Australia 1880-1940.
Interpretations of maps based on the bible.
Squatters and urban growth in Amazonia.
Migration to the gold-mining frontier in Brazilian...
The Jebel Al-Akhdar (Oman).
The most important things about teaching I learned from the mentally retarded.
The accelerated physical education program.
Reflections on reflective teaching in a physical education teacher education methods course.
Systematic observation behavior similarities of various youth sport soccer coaches.
Physical fitness testing: The effects of rewards and feedback on intrinsic motivation.
Knowledge and attitudes of low-fit college students following a short-term fitness education...
Adapted physical education assessment practices in Wisconsin.
Youth sport readiness: A predictive model for success.
Administrative recommendations for increasing the number of female coaches at two year colleges.
Characteristics of physical education faculty in Historically Black Colleges and Universities...
Self-selected physical activity profiles in children and adolescents.
Restriction of ankle inversion: Taping versus an ankle brace.
Planning practices and attitudes of physical education teachers.
Current status of merit pay practices in higher education departments of physical education.
A descriptive profile of teacher preparation practices in physical education teacher education.
Focus group interviewing: An underutilized evaluative technique in physical education research.
Comprehensive assessment through collaboration: A partnership model.
Moonlighting: The norm for physical educators.
Dance education for undergraduate physical education majors.
The preparation of physical education majors in adventure activities.
The student teaching practicum: Placement trends and issues.
Distribution of minority doctorates in physical education.
Preparation of health promotion specialists for the wellness movement.
A play therapy model: Implications for physical education teachers of preschool children with...
`The graduate assistant coach: A preliminary profile of an endangered species'.
Fitness strategies in high school physical education programs.
Student teachers: Incidents that lead them to confirm or question their career choice.
Developing pedagogical skills of preservice teachers through goal setting and computer generated...
Subverting the context: Public space and public design.
Reinventing the museum.
The new sound of music.
Bringing back the settlement house.
Is the Rehnquist Court conservative?
The post-capitalist world.
Redefining equality: The liberalism of Mickey Kaus.
On Hamilton and popular government.
Thriving families in the Swedish welfare state.
Family decline: A rejoinder.
The story of John Turner.
Black Philadelphia, then and now.
How the great society `destroyed the American family.'
Why is black educational achievement rising?
For the sake of the children.
Private interests and Superfund.
Clean fuels, dirty air: How a (bad) bill became law.
Springboard.
1991: The year in RE:view.
Skills needed for successful employment: A review of the literature.
Stress, Locus of Control, and Psychological Status in Black South African Migrants.
Direct Experience With a Cancer Self-Exam: Effects on Cognitions and Behavior.
Perception of and Concern About Sociocultural Change and General Psychopathology in Saudi Arabian University Students.
Consequences of Person-Environmental Incongruence: Absenteeism, Frustration, and Stress.
Responses to Injustices by Hong Kong Chinese College Students.
Person-Situation Effects on Self-Presentation on the Telephone at Work.
Attitudes Toward Love Among Members of a Small Fundamentalist Community in South Africa.
Performance Appraisal of Managers: Goal Interdependence, Ratings, and Outcomes.
Factors Influencing Ethnic Attitudes in South African Work Situations.
Social Correlates of Confucian Ethics in Taiwan.
Perceptions of External Barriers and the Career Success of Female Managers in Singapore.
History's Lessons.
Coincidence anticipation: Possible critical variables.
Perceived stressors for football and volleyball officials from three rating levels.
Effects of association and dissociation on effort perception.
The effect of general and task-specific self-efficacy on the performance of a fine motor task.
On the reduction of reaction time with mental practice.
The effect of goal difficulty and task complexity on intrinsic motivation and motor performance.
The `sport career death' of college athletes: Involuntary and unanticipated sport exits.
The impact of music and imagery on physical performance and arousal: Studies of coordination and...
The effects of three mental preparation on strength performance of young and older adults.
The relationship between motivation and self-efficacy in competitive athletes participating in...
Why young wrestlers `hang up' their singlet: An exploratory investigation comparing two models...
The birthdate effect and college athletic participation: Some comparisons.
Surfing: Motivations, values, and culture.
Colonialism, socialism and destabilization in Mozambique.
Mozambique: A painful reconciliation.
Remembering Eduardo: Reflections on the life and legacy of Eduardo Mondlane.
US foreign policy: Lessons from the Angola conflict.
US foreign policy and the Angolan peace.
Media coverage of the Angolan war.
Organizing support for Mozambique and Angola.
Fatally flawed mediation: Cordier and the Congo crisis of 1960.
Zaire's ties to Belgium: Persistence and future prospects in political economy. (cover story)
Beyond self-protection to prophecy: The Catholic Church and political change in Zaire. (cover story)
Kenya: Slouching toward democracy.
Human rights and the liberation struggle...the importance of creative tension.
The United States and Africa after the Cold War.
Transgressing fundamental boundaries: The struggle for women's human rights.
Rawlings `wins' Ghana's presidential elections: Establishing a new constitutional order.
The invention of ethnicity: A perspective from the U.S.A.
Comment: Ethnic invention and acculturation, a bumpy-line approach.
Comment: `The Invention of Ethnicity': The amen corner.
Response.
Religion, ethnicity and the development of private homes for the aged.
After the land league: The persistence of Irish-American labor radicalism in Denver, 1897-1905.
Immigrant origins and sponsor policies: Sources of change in South Jersey Jewish colonies.
From under the sojourner's shadow: A historiographical study of Chinese female immigration to...
Liang Qichao and the Chinese of America: A re-evaluation of his Selected Memoir of Travels in the...
The treatment of women in immigration history: A call for change.
Comment: Donna Gabaccia.
Comment: Hasia R. Diner.
Comment: Maxine Schwartz Seller.
New themes in an old story: Transplanted Mennonites as group settlers in North America, 1874-1879.
The Iroquois and the world's rim: Speculations on color, culture, and contact.
`Some of them ... would always have a minister with them': Mohawk Protestantism, 1683-1719.
Powhatan priests and English rectors: World views and congregations in conflict.
Religious encounters in a colonial context: New England and New France in the seventeenth century.
The biological encounter: Disease and the ideological domain.
Christopher Columbus: Lost havens in the ruins of representation
Book reviews.
The dynamic of Indian demographic collapse in the San Francisco Bay missions , Alta California...
Investigating child sexual abuse in the American Indian community.
Self-sufficiency and the creation of dependency: The case of Chief Isaac Inc .
The `heathen party': Methodist observation of the Ohio Wyandot.
Thinking and believing: Nativism and unity in the ages of Pontiac and Tecumseh.
Historic change in Western Shoshone country: The establishment of the Western Shoshone National...
Comfortable fictions and the struggle for turf: An essay review of The Invented Indian: Cultural...
American children's literature: Background and bibliography.
The struggle for social change in 1960s America: A bibliographic essay.
Moscow meets Manhattan: The Russian soul of Woody Allen's films.
In search of a redeemed vision: The American women's novel, 1880s-1980s.
Overseas students in the United States: The quest for socio-cultural and linguistic models.
Exploring collection development guidelines for American studies in China: An integration of...
The changing attitudes of Africans towards American intellectual culture.
American studies in Africa: A progress report.
Everybody loves Abraham, Martin, John--and Paul and Meryl: International views of American culture.
Democracy and human rights in the shadow of the west.
Arab nationalism: A retrospective evaluation.
The Yemen Arab Republic's legacy and Yemeni unification.
Turkish foreign policy toward the Arab-Israeli conflict: Duality and the development (1950-1991).
Managing national development in the Arab states.
Primary education and national development: The case of Arab society.
Political correlates of privatization programs in the Middle East.
Arab world privatization: Key to development?
National development and political protest: Islamists in the Maghreb countries.
Western imperialism in the Middle East: The case of the United States' military...
Geopolitics and development: A Nepalese perspective.
Vietnam's 1991 party elections.
The Philippines: After Aquino.
Humanitarianism, mercantilism, or comprehensive security? Disbursement patterns of Japanese...
Pragmatism and Soviet foreign policy: USSR-South Korean relations.
Perceptions, misperceptions, and policy: Taiwan's assessment of the democracy movement in the...
U.S.-Vietnamese normalization.
Singapore's foreign policy terrain.
Korea: Leading the Third World in democratization.
The Chinese Communist Party's perception of crisis and methods of crisis solving during the...
Economic policy and the Economic Planning Board (EPB) in Korea.
The investments of U.S. and Japanese multinational corporations in Korea: A comparative...
Political institutionalization of labor in Korea.
FOREIGN POLICY AFTER THE ELECTION.
AMERICA'S FIRST POST-COLD WAR PRESIDENT.
THE COLD WAR AND ITS AFTERMATH.
FINLAND VINDICATED.
FROM SARAJEVO TO SARAJEVO.
HUMAN RIGHTS QUANDARY.
EMPOWERING THE UNITED NATIONS.
RUSSIAN NATIONALISM.
EUROPE AFTER MAASTRICHT.
CHINA: THE COMING POWER.
CAN THE TWO KOREAS BE ONE?
SOUTH ASIA'S TAKE-OFF.
SPECIAL REPORT: POLICYMAKING FOR A NEW ERA.
After San Antonio.
United States Andean drug policy: Background and issues for decisionmakers.
Why the illegal psychoactive drugs industry grew in Colombia.
Peru, the drug business and Shining Path: Between Scylla and Charybdis?
Unprecedented disparities, unparalled adjustment needs: Winners and losers on the NAFTA...
The Commonwealth Caribbean in the New World Order: Between Europe and North America?
Capitalist regime loyalties and redemocratization in Chile.
The Aylwin government and `tutelary' democracy: A concept in search of a case?
Ecuador: Putting an end to ghosts of the past?
K-12 Junior Achievement spans the curriculum.
How does a community work? Junior Achievement's new program for second graders.
Project Business: The bridge between business and education.
Applied economics: A program that actively involves students in learning.
Were things really so cheap in the `good old days'?
The Social Studies and Project 2061: An opportunity for harmony.
Past as prologue: The legacy of Sputnik.
Reading The Talking Earth with middle school students.
KISSing in the history classroom: Simple writing activities that work.
The predictive strength of social studies for achievement in government classes in Nigerian schools.
Rationales for issues-centered social studies education.
Teaching public issues in the secondary school classroom.
Foreign policy issues: A high school application for the Engle and Ochoa reflective teaching model.
Looking forward to the stock market.
Ethnography for teacher education.
The deposing of the Hawaiian monarch: The changing narrative in textbooks.
History in my hand--making artifact kits in the intermediate grades.
A race against time: An interdisciplinary investigation.
Resolving students' confusion about indefinite time expressions.
An approach to designing thoughtful units.
What's hot and what's not in effective citizenship instruction.
Should the minimum drinking age be changed?
Development in children's thinking about international trade.
American history and cooperative learning.
Five hundred years after the Old World discovered the New World.
Making history live for secondary students: Infusing people into the narrative.
Reflections on the New Social Studies.
Who's who in Michaelangelo's Creation of Adam: A chronology of the picture's reluctant...
The Magnifici Tomb: A key project in Michaelangelo's architectural career.
Gericault's severed heads and limbs: The politics and aesthetics of the scaffold.
Some evangelical roots for Hebert's Toujours et jamais.
Ford Madox Brown's Work: An iconographic analysis.
Fernand Khnopff, Georges Rodenbach and Bruges, the dead city.
Cubism, Celtism and the body politic.
Cosmopolitan difference in Max Dvorak's art historiography.
Sacred space under erasure in ancient synagogues and early churches.
Music curricula in the future.
Professional associations, the future, and The Wizard of Oz.
The leadership issue.
DBAE and criticism.
The master music educator for century XXI.
Power politics and arts education.
The total curriculum: A new strategy.
Can the arts and humanities survive technology?
Multicultural education and the visual arts.
A comparative framework for designing visual art curricula.
Teacher education and graduate studies in art education.
Computer-mediated art education: Extending the paradigm of computer art.
Point and counterpoint in Lope de Vega's Rimas and Rimas sacras.
Necrology.
Studies in the transfer of a word to a different lexical family: The case of Spanish apurar/apuro.
Abulia, nineteenth-century psychology and the generation of 1898.
The architecture of Ausias March's first death song (poem 92).
The king's son and the golden dew: Alchemy in Calderon's `La vida es sueno.'
A contrapuntal and Spenglerian approach to Misericordia.
HYBRID CONVERSOS IN THE "LIBRO LLAMADO EL ALBORAIQUE".
CLOSE CULTURAL ENCOUNTERS: SPEECH AND WRITING INFUENTEOVEJUNA.
MEN BY WOMEN IN THE CONTEMPORARY SPANISH NOVEL.
True crime stories during the dictatorship: Brazil's romance-reportagem [nonfiction novel].
Periodical literature for women in mid-nineteenth century Cuba: The case of Gertrudis Gomez de...
Arnaldo Jabor's Eu te amo [I Love You]: Erotica or socio-political commentary?
Revolution and dreams: The Cuban documentary today.
The cofraternity of (un)finishable emotions: Constructing Mexican telenovelas.
Radio soap operas: The Jamaican experience 1958-1989.
Nicaraguan poetry workshops: The democratization of poetry.
Territorial and boundary disputes depicted on postage stamps.
Sport and the promotion of nationalism in Latin America: A preliminary interpretation.
The Official Story: Feminist re-visioning as spectator response.
YES or NO to Pinochet: Television in the 1988 Chilean plebiscite.
MENC today.
Teaching learners of all ages.
Making choral music with older adults.
New horizons for senior adults.
Music making beyond the classroom.
Human potential and lifelong learning.
A new look at teaching music history.
Elementary school choirs and auditions.
Partnership, motivation, and mainstreaming.
The MENC adviser.
Competition is music education the loser?
Advanced Placement more than a test.
Bringing general music techniques to the instrumental class.
Is evaluation fair to music educators?
Technology for teaching.
Technology for teaching.
Philosophy and the music teacher: Challenging the way we think.
Singing in America.
Elementary music con moto.
Crossing disciplinary lines for musical learning.
Teaching and learning.
The state of gifted education.
Measuring musical giftedness.
Speaking the `gifted and talented' language.
Magnet music programs.
Designing a curriculum for the gifted and talented.
Making music festivals work.
MENC today.
Music software and emerging technology.
New tools for music education.
Future technology working for education.
New solutions to curricular problems.
Classroom management and the disruptive child.
The ukulele in your classroom.
Soul in the culture of African Americans.
Narratology: Status and outlook.
The modes of narrativity and their visual metaphors.
Filtering Rimmon-Kenan, Chatman, Black, Freud, and James: Focalization and the divided self in...
The parable of the prodigal son: An economic reading.
In pursuit of self: Theme, narration, and focalization in Christa Wolf's Patterns of Childhood.
Writing and modernism: Michel Tournier's Friday.
Pluralism in classical style theory: From rhetoric and poetics to art history.
Authorial styles and the frequencies of very common words: Jonson, Shakespeare, and the...
The historical present in Charlotte Bronte's novels: Some discourse functions.
Possible worlds in recent literary theory.
Feminist theory and Foucault: A bibliographic essay.
Recent journal articles in French in narrative theory.
After and beyond `New Criticism'.
L&IACUTE;DIA JORGE'S STRATEGIES OF NAVIGATION: EATING AND PSYCHOANALYSIS IN O CAIS DAS MERENDAS.
A MEDICAL READING OF GERVAISE IN L'ASSOMMOIR.
DOUBLE VOICES AND FORKING PATHS: BAROJA'S CAMINO DE PERFECCIÓN.
Effacement of the author and the function of sadism in Flaubert's Salammbo.
The structure of education in Gide's L'Immoraliste.
Lady Murasaki Shikibu's The Tale of Genji: Search for the mother.
Modesty and the artist's model in Le Chef-d'oeuvre inconnu.
The re-making of love: Louise Labe's Debat de Folie et d'Amour.
Laforet's Nada as female Bildung?
Irony and license in new memories of the Conquest: Gonzalo Guerrero.
The making of a minor character: Galdos's Placido Estupina.
INTERLINGUAL METATHEATRICALISM: MANET'S L'AUTRE DON JUAN.
Introduction and history of the Canada-U.S. Law Institute.
Conference opening.
Key environmental issues for the 1990s and beyond in Canada and the U.S.
Key environmental issues for the 1990s and beyond in Canada.
Discussion after the speeches of David T. Buzzelli and Roderick M. McLeod.
Environmental protection--the U.S. approach.
Canadian environmental law: An overview.
Discussion after the speeches of William W. Falsgraf and Roger Cotton.
European environmental regulation.
The competitive implications of European environmental regulations for Canada and the U.S.
Discussion after the speech of Dale E. Stephenson.
An U.S. perspective on the import and export of hazardous wastes: Towards more effective...
How big is our backyard?
Discussion after the speeches of Jane Seigler and Robert J. Redhead.
The application of the United States hazardous waste cleanup laws in the Canada-U.S. context.
Transboundary pollution and cross-border remedies.
Discussion after the speeches of John N. Hanson and Michael I. Jeffery.
An U.S. perspective on the North American Free Trade Agreement and the environment: The...
Trade and the environment: Dialogue of the deaf or scope for cooperation?
Does genetic engineering need genetic engineers?: Should the regulation of genetic engineering...
Local pesticide regulation since Wisconsin Public Intervenor v. Mortier.
Environmental regulation in Michigan and Massachusetts: Two states with two different solutions...
Environmental tobacco smoke and its effect on children: Controlling smoking in the home.
Judicial interpretation of state constitutional rights to a healthful environment.
Toward a world order respectful of the global ecosystem.
The role of the Environmental Protection Agency.
The global environmental crisis.
Urgently needed: A nationwide appraisal of the growth problem.
Antaeus and the public trust doctrine: A new approach to substantive environmental protection ...
Judicial enforcement of state and municipal compliance with the Clean Water Act: Can the courts ...
Juridical statehood in sub-Saharan Africa.
Challenges to Africa's boundaries in the new world order.
Political transition and the dilemma of civil society in Africa.
The historicity of African societies.
Sub-Saharan Africa: Development performance and prospects.
The World Bank and the IMF in sub-Saharan Africa: Undermining development and environmental...
Seeking regional economic cooperation in Africa.
African initiatives for development: The practice of regional economic cooperation in Southern...
Challenging U.S. policy toward Africa: Conversations with Randall Robinson.
Africa's post-cold war demilitarization: Domestic and global causes.
International intervention in South Africa: The difficult transition to development assistance.
South Africa: The impact of sanctions.
The modernity of nationalism: Nations, states and nation-states in the contemporary world.
Sovereignty in transition.
Tocqueville and the end of history.
The end of socialism's historical theology and its rebirth in Fukuyama's thesis.
Modern liberty and the moral contents of life: An introduction to the political reflection of...
De Gaulle as hero.
A man for this season: Vaclav Havel on freedom and responsibility.
Character, virtue, and human nature.
The APSA Committee on political parties: Some reconsiderations of its work and significance.
Responsible party government in America.
Why the United States does not have responsible parties.
Lurching through public law: The unsteady state of the subfield.
The development of comparative judicial politics.
Beyond the law school: Teaching law in political science.
James A. Smith's The Idea Brokers: Think tanks and the rise of the new policy elite.
Hubert H. Humphrey: Reflections on a twentieth-century life.
Hubert Humphrey and political science.
Humphrey and civil rights: The politics of racial progress.
The not-so-imperial vice-presidency.
Chronology.
Taiwan's democratization: A summary.
Political development in the Republic of China on Taiwan, 1985-1992: An insider's view.
Taiwan's December 1991 election.
Taiwan's 1992 Legislative Yuan election.
Taiwan and South Korea: The `democratization' of outlier states.
The end of communism: Chapter II.
Statement by Shen Tong.
Will China be democratic?
Dilemmas of economic reform in China.
The army, the peasantry, and China's future.
Freedom and development in Latin America.
Did Stalin plan a Drang nach Westen?
Is the nation-state over?
The Vatican's foreign policy after the collapse of Soviet communism.
Western assessments of Gorbachev's policies in the Third World.
Why does Castro survive?
Exporting rhetoric, importing oil: United States relations with Venezuela, 1945-1948.
Double-blind trial of aspirin in primary prevention of myocardial infarction in patients with...
Effect of negative pressure ventilation in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Impaired endothelium-dependent vasodilation of forearm resistance vessels in hypercholesterolaemia.
Polymerase chain reaction for diagnosis of meningococcal meningitis.
Comparison of oral-steroid sparing by high-dose and low-dose inhaled steroid in maintenance...
Randomised trial of self-expanding metal stents versus polyethylene stents for distal malignant...
Bone turnover in malnourished children.
Comparison of saliva and serum for HIV surveillance in developing countries.
Lipoprotein(a) and accelerated coronary artery disease in cardiac transplant recipients.
The molecular pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease: Clinical prospects.
Red blood cell transfusion in warm-type autoimmune haemolytic anaemia.
The extent of man from Vitruvius to Marfan.
Safety of stringent prophylactic platelet transfusion policy for patients with acute leukaemia.
Detection of melanoma cells in peripheral blood by means of reverse transcriptase and polymerase...
Specific immunoglobulin for treatment of whooping cough.
Uterine contractility and induction of abortion in early pregnancy by misoprostol and mifepristone.
Mycobacterium bovis infection in human beings in contact with elk (Cervus elaphus) in Alberta,...
Morbidity and mortality in the Swedish Trial in Old Patients with Hypertension (STOP-hypertension).
Prevention of traveller's diarrhoea by oral B-subunit/whole cell cholera vaccine.
Non-adrenergic, non-cholinergic nervous system and overnight airway calibre in asthmatic and...
Epidemiological basis for clinical diagnosis of childhood malaria in endemic zone in West Africa.
Upper airway obstruction during nasal intermittent positive-pressure hyperventilation in sleep.
Cost effectiveness of chemotherapy for pulmonary tuberculosis in three sub-Saharan African...
Vaccine safety versus vaccine efficacy in mass immunisation programmes.
Pulmonary embolism, pulmonary hypertension, and choriocarcinoma.
Maintenance chemotherapy and cure of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.
Determinants of HIV disease progression: Six-year longitudinal study in the Edinburgh...
Dynamic graciloplasty for treatment of faecal incontinence.
Development of an electrically stimulated neoanal sphincter.
Interface shear stresses during ambulation with a below-knee prosthetic limb.
Comparison of signal-to-noise ratio of myoelectric filters for prosthesis control.
Comparative effects of posture on pressure and shear at the body-seat interface.
A manufacturing system for contoured foam cushions.
Application of a programmable dual-channel adaptive electrical stimulation system...
An examination of direct selection typing rate and accuracy for persons...
A human factors approach to adapted access device prescription and customization.
Automated fabrication of mobility aids (AFMA): Below-knee CASD/CAM testing and evaluation program...
Metabolic and hemodynamic responses to concurrent voluntary arm crank and electrical stimulation...
Biomechanical analysis of wheelchair propulsion for various seating positions.
The contribution of selected anthropometric and physiological variables to 10K performance of...
A computer-aided socket design procedure for above-knee prostheses.
A two-step segmentation method for automatic recognition of speech of persons who are deaf.
Computer as a group teaching aid for persons who are blind.
A lawyer's brief against litigating academic disputes.
Why Steele demands more of blacks than of whites.
An affirmative vote for affirmative action.
Errors of the Afrocentrists.
African historiography: New myths for old.
Multiculturalism's Jewish problem.
History by quota?
Institutionally imposed social agendas.
A reconsideration of Afro-American literature.
Distorted `lessons' from the Vietnam War.
Ideology and literary studies: PMLA 1930-1990.
Weeding in.
Affirmative action at Virginia Tech: The tail that wagged the dog.
How the University of Minnesota was subverted by litigation.
Psychiatric misadventures.
Berlin and its counterworlds.
A culture of one's own.
An Amish beginning.
Letter from Serbia.
Educating performers.
The abyss revisited.
The trouble with Adam Smith.
One heart's canon.
A gentleman of the old school: Homi Bhabha and the development of science in India.
Macbeth appalled (I).
Sexual desires, poetic creation.
The road to Singapore and back.
First hates.
The NEH and the battle of the books.
Bringing out Roland Barthes.
Karachi, 1990.
Citizen Vidal and Mailer's America.
Erotic literature in postwar France.
A farewell to the pen.
Libraries, museums, and reading.
Emunah: The craft of faith.
Praying the ABCs: Reflections on faith in history.
Transcending Marxism: Liberation theology and critical theology.
Christianity in the marketplace: Christmas and the consumer culture.
Being a Jew at Christmas time.
Hundred dollar holidays.
W.E.B. Du Bois and the struggle for African America's soul.
Why truthfulness requires forgiveness: Commencement address for graduates of a college of the...
Falling.
On the suffering and rights of children: Toward a theology of childhood liberation.
Jews, Christians, and unique revelation.
The compassion of God the Father in Western art.
Catholic social doctrine and new thinking in economics.
That they may converse: Voices of Catholic social thought.
Moses, Jesus, and Marx: Utopians in search of justice.
Moderating influences of hypnotic susceptibility on signal-detection task performance.
The effect of gender and time-of-day on time perception and mental workload.
Belief systems and coping styles as mediating variables in the relationship between hostility and...
Nontemporal measures of performance on a computerized block design task.
Effect of sulpiride on amphetamine-induced activity and stereotyped locomotion.
Electrodermal fluctuation as a function of verbal incentive.
The menstrual distress questionnaire: Are the critics right?
Common factors in five measures of cognitive styles.
The construction of the self: An evolutionary view.
Gender differences in old age in ratings of aggression/assertiveness.
The application of relative deprivation theory to justice perception of preferential selection.
Forward masking in young children: Rocketship psychophysics.
Self-esteem in American and Chinese (Taiwanese) children.
Effect of caption meaning on memory for nonsense figures.
Ratings of the familiarity of idioms' figurative meanings and the likelihood of literal meanings...
Brand character as a function of brand loyalty.
Luria-Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery: High rates of false positives for geriatric subjects.
Performance of British university psychology departments as measured by number of publications in...
Slaves to Freedom. (cover story)
Relativism and the Limits of Rationality.
The Right Declares a Culture War.
The PC Police in the Mirror of History.
We Have Met the Alien and It Is Us.
Oppression, Race, and Humanism.
The Environment Us Versus It?
The Voter's Guide to Church-State Issues.
The Wise Silence.
Radiation and Cancer.
Rational Recovery and the Addiction to 12-Step Therapies.
Having a Meaningful Versus a Meaningless Life.
Hanging' with Zontar at the Grassy Knoll.
The `women's holocaust.'
The search for scapegoat deviants.
The great right snark hunt.
The suppression of NSSM 200.
Basic instincts?
Imagination, education, and our postmodern possibilities.
Rudolf Steiner as a social thinker.
Love as a mode of knowledge.
Educating for creative thinking, the Waldorf approach.
Montessori's `Method': Stewardship of the spirit.
Waldorf education in America: A promise and its problems.
Communities: In nature and at home.
The dark night of the scholar: Reflections on culture and ways of knowing.
On understanding intentional words.
Dimensions of knowing: Narrative, paradigm, and ritual.
Carlos Castaneda.
Whither dark night of the scholar?
Spiderwoman's thread: The interpenetration of psyche and cosmology.
Mastery and mystery: Symbolic narrative, ritual, and moral order in the San Francisco AIDS...
Three ways of ethnographic knowing.
The reality of spirits.
Psychology, post-modernism, and multiculturalism in the work of Richard Shweder.
Two medieval soteriologies: Anselm of Canterbury and Julian of Norwich.
Charism in the early church since Rudolph Sohm: An ecumenical challenge.
The challenge of moral distinctions.
The heart in Rahner's philosophy of mysticism.
Roger Haight's Spirit Christology.
The faith of Jesus.
The magisterium of the Faculty of Theology of Paris in the seventeenth century.
Moral imagination in the theological method and church tradition: John Henry Newman.
The Holy Spirit and theology of the cross: Significance for dialogue.
The problem of socialism in liberation theology.
Civil Supremacy over the Military: Its Nature and Limits.
The Soviet Military before and after the August Coup: Departization and Decentralization.
The Transformation of the Soviet Military and the August Coup.
The Development of the American Theory of Limited War, 1945-63.
The Paraguayan Military in Transition and the Evolution of Civil-Military Relations.
Ethnic Conflict in the Military of Developing Nations: A Comparative Analysis of India and Nigeria.
Introduction: Medical, Policy, and Organizational Perspectives on Military Health Care.
HIV-1/AIDS and U.S. Military Manpower Policy.
Progress Toward Eliminating Drug and Alcohol Abuse among U.S. Military Personnel.
Obesity and Its Relation to Physical Fitness in the U.S. Military.
Health Status of Women in the Armed Forces.
Life Satisfaction Among Israeli Soldiers With Penetrating Head Wounds.
A Stakeholder Management Perspective on Military Health Care.
Tropical community dynamics and conservation biology.
Short-term dynamics of a neotropical forest.
Biodiversity and forest change in Malaysian Borneo.
Population variation in a tropical bird community.
Catastrophic change in species-rich freshwater ecosystems.
The biological dynamics of tropical rainforest fragments.
Ecology, government legitimacy, and a changing world order.
Methods for teaching investigative skills in college introductory biology--pilot to program.
Botcher of the bay or economic boon?
Environmental and economic costs of pesticide use.
Population, sustainability, and Earth's carrying capacity.
Biodiversity at Rio.
A centenary reassessment of J.B.S. Haldane, 1892-1964.
Survey of AIBS societies--membership trends and perceptions of the future.
Decisions at the zoo.
Access to the upper forest canopy with a large tower crane. (cover story)
The odyssey of Arctic haze. (cover story)
The struggle to save our world heritage.
The Colorado doctrine and in-stream flows.
Boston Harbor's murky political waters. (cover story)
Tapping alternatives: The benefits of managing urban water demands. (cover story)
The 4P approach to dealing with scientific uncertainty.
Policy implications of greenhouse warming.
The Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council.
Appraising the earth summit. (cover story)
A summary of the major documents signed at the Earth summit and the global forum. (cover story)
The Columbian encounter and land-use change.
Dealing with pollution. (cover story)
Earth in the balance sheet.
Global environmental change: Understanding the human dimensions.
The Relationship Between Organizational Factors and Accounting for Information Systems Costs.
Integrating Expert Systems and Database Technologies: An Intelligent Decision Support System for Investigating Cost Variances.
Computer-Mediated Communication and Structured Interaction in Transfer Pricing Negotiation.
The Changing Use of Spreadsheets by Accountants in New Zealand: A Comparison of 1991 with 1986.
The Information Systems Auditor's Review of the Systems Development Process and its Impact on Software Maintenance Efforts.
Transition from a Command to a Market Economy: Creation of a Valid Management Information System.
Reporting Strategies for 'Events' Accounting.
A Computational Model of an Events-Based Object-Oriented Accounting Information System for Inventory Management.
Intrusion-Detection Systems.
An Empirical Evaluation of User Information Satisfaction (UIS) Measures for Use with General Ledger Accounting Software.
Computer-Based General Ledger Systems: An Exploratory Study.
Characteristics of Billfish Anglers in the U.S. Atlantic Ocean.
Effects of the Santa Barbara, Calif., oil spill on the apparent abundance of Pelagic fishery...
Remote camera and trapping survey of the deep-water shrimps Heterocarpus laevigatus....
On the distribution and fishery potential of the Japanese red crab Chaceon granulatus in the ...
Lethal parasites in oysters from coastal Georgia with discussion of disease and management...
Differences in dolphin mortality rates in night and day sets for the U.S. eastern tropical...
The U.S. Gulf of Mexico party boats industry: Activity centers, species targeted, and fisheries...
The U.S. Gulf of Mexico charter boat industry: Activity centers, species targeted, and fisheries...
Disease risks associated with importation of nonindigenous marine animals.
The National Marine Fisheries Service habitat conservation efforts in Louisiana, 1980 through 1990.
An economic analysis of Texas shrimp season closures.
Subsurface fish handling to limit decompression effects on deepwater species.
Yellow sole, Pleuronectes asper, of the Eastern Bering Sea: Biological characteristics, history of..
Potential impact of PCB's on bluefish, Pomatomus saltatrix, management.
Status, constraints, and opportunities for salmon culture in the United States: A review.
Shortraker rockfish, Sebastes borealis, observed from a manned submersible.
Urania's heritage: A historical introduction to women in astronomy.
Meteorites that have struck home.
Exploring the nuclei of galaxies.
Wallace Campbell: The twelfth Bruce Medalist.
The Juggler nebula, the wrong-way spiral arm, and other astronomy news.
Something for everyone in the world of astronomy.
The society pages.
The first one second of the universe.
George Ellery Hale: The thirteenth Bruce medalist.
A collision over collisions: A tale of astronomy and politics.
The Spaceguard Survey: Protecting the earth from cosmic impacts.
Interception of near-earth objects.
Rendezvous in space: The science of comets.
Ernest W. Brown: The fifteenth Bruce medalist.
The 1992 ASP awards.
Society pages.
Return to the red planet: Mars Observer.
Part II: Visitors to Earth?
The astro-physics of baseball.
Edward Emerson Barnard: The fourteenth Bruce medalist.
Infant solar systems, black holes, massive explosions, and other Astronomy news.
Hard rock.
Opus 200.
Egghead.
Rio Cebolla Marsh, New Mexico.
Lash of the dragon.
Murder and mayhem in the miocene.
A bird with the guts to eat leaves.
Bringing up baby. (cover story)
In their own words.
Grasping the nettle.
Mosquitoes unlimited.
Of mice and mosquitoes.
Pandora's bite.
The case of the quick-change killer.
Life in a deathtrap.
Duel in the sun.
The butterfly of mosquitoes.
Tales of a mosquito psychologist.
Epidemic proportions.
Adaptable immigrant.
Malaria's genetic billiards game.
`Red in tooth and claw.'
Between sun and shadow.
The gold bugs.
The bottom of the bottom of the world. (cover story)
Where all the women are strong.
History in a stewpot.
AUTHORS.
Columbus's comedown.
Life in a punctuation.
Columbus and the river of birds.
Broken kernels: An international saga.
Processing digital color images: From capture to display.
From photons to bits.
Color in electronic displays.
Digital color printing.
From rhetoric to reality in science: Between Little Rock and a hard place.
Commission on NSF's future endorses the past--oracularly.
Tanning turtles.
Ozone, climate, and global atmospheric change.
News notes.
News notes.
A legal update on sexual harassment in the public schools.
Scab! Crossing the picket line in a teacher strike.
Collaboration: A link between the high school and the university.
Sex education in the English classroom.
Quality is not a quick fix.
Teacher questions and schema activation.
The challenge of building character.
Electronic test generators: What current programs can do for teachers.
Science or aesthetics: A journey through chemistry class.
Developing a global perspective through cooperative learning.
Components of an effective substitute teacher program.
A study guide for students.
The learning disabled adolescent and whole language.
Facilitating holistic curriculum planning in schools.
Instructional strategies for minority youth.
Untracking through the use of cooperative learning.
Teaching social studies: The standards movement.
Lecturing and loving it: Applying the information-processing model.
Cooperative learning and multicultural classrooms.
Using the `grapevine' to effect change in schools.
The overlooked position of subject area supervisor.
Pre-service teachers' use of videotape for self-evaluation.
Developing effective university and public school partnerships.
Directed reading-thinking activities to promote learning through reading in mathematics.
Mentor perceptions of contact with beginning teachers.
British inservice for American educators.
Project success: Outstanding principals speak out.
Define and teach employability skills to guarantee student success.
Site-based management: A survey of Nevada principals.
The great Masonic odyssey: Birth of a democracy.
Origins of masonry.
Cumulative evidence of the relationship between work tenure and generalized locus of control...
Professional development for teachers of mathematics.
The school phobic child and the counselor: Identifying, understanding and helping.
School counselor role statements: Fact or fiction.
Feature author.
Re-conceptualizing the self-efficacy paradigm: Analysis of an eight-year study.
Mainstreaming students with disabilities using self-efficacy.
Education of students with disabilities: A joint research study between the United States and Japan.
An introduction to nearly optimal programming an extension of sensitivity analysis in linear...
Beyond the formulas--mathematics education for prospective elementary school teachers.
Creativity and birth order/sex differences in children.
Cooperative communication and planning interaction: The role of the library media program in...
Teachers and administrators: Who's who?
Community within diverse settings: Reflection on school success.
Enhancing accreditation success through simulation.
When does a learner `understand'? Cognitive and psychological components in the process of...
Discovering the future of education.
Factor analysis and ordinal data.
Teacher education in India.
MIS program in smaller colleges: Politics and other problems.
Protecting a valuable resource teachers at risk.
Influence of personal beliefs and attitudes on certification of pre-service teachers.
Higher education changes & innovations for the 21st. century.
Arnold Schwarzenegger the extremist.
Assessment in mathematics: Three alternative strategies.
Improved curve fitting with least absolute deviation.
Teaching/learning relationship.
The impact of juku on Japanese students.
Retention of visual and verbal content and perceived self-competence in audiovisual instruction.
Developing writing skills for students with bilingual special education needs.
Another look at mastery learning.
The feasibility of an information-processing methodology for the assessment of vocabulary...
The affective domain, science, and the middle school student.
Optimum mental functioning.
Grandparents and group learning.
The private school arguments.
The misrepresentation of scientific uncertainty: The number of genes in the human cell.
Scientific history and the educational significance of eponyms in science and medical instruction.
Transforming the elementary school.
Freedom and technology in the new Russia.
Awakening student's critical thinking powers through logic problems.
The effect of notetaking and underlining on achievement in middle school life science.
Parent and student attitudes toward mathematics as they relate to third grade mathematics...
Home versus school: Parents' perceptions of the development of rituals leading to young...
An undergraduate reading laboratory for at-risk children: An ethnographic evaluation.
Perceptions and stress factors of African-American preservice teachers in urban schools.
Differential effects of primary, activity and computer reinforcement on decreasing the off-task...
The effect of the interaction of teacher and student expectation on reading achievement in second...
Teacher perception of intensive phonics.
Developing global functioning of military personnel: A essential element of Air Force leadership.
Revitalizing classroom assessment: Using tests to promote learning.
Futurism in vocational education.
Relationship between creativity and nonconformity to school discipline as perceived by teachers...
Another search for the effects of teaching thinking and problem solving skills on college...
Methodological issues in the assessment of children's reading interests.
Historical perspectives on the development of academic fund raising.
A look at addiction.
Japanese students in America: II. college friendship patterns.
An investigation of the paradox of underachievement among gifted Black students.
Intervention programs for gifted girls.
Underachieving gifted students: Intervention programs that work.
The cognitive enrichment network program: Goodness of fit with at-risk gifted students.
The social cognition of gifted adolescents: An exploration of the stigma of giftedness paradigm.
An historical content analysis of publications in gifted education journals.
Preventing and remediating writing disabilities: Interdisciplinary frameworks for assessment...
Relationships between oral and written language.
Prevalence of writing problems across three middle school samples.
Theory-based branching diagnosis of writing disabilities.
Contributions of developmental psychology to understanding revision: Implications for consultation..
Improving the writing of students with learning problems: Self-regulated strategy development.
Integrating strategy instruction and word processing into a process approach to writing instruction.
The relationship between the WJ-R Gf-Gc cognitive clusters and writing achievement...
Developmental language disorders in children: Relationship with learning disability...
Children with prenatal cocaine exposure: Resilient or handicapped?
Contextual variables affecting instructional adaptation for difficult-to-teach students.
On the concept of child advocacy: A review of theory and methodology.
THE UNHAPPY RELATIONSHIP OF FEMINISM AND POSTMODERNISM IN ANTHROPOLOGY.
FRAMES OF POSITIONALITY: CONSTRUCTING MEANINGFUL DIALOGUES ABOUT GENDER AND RACE.
FEMINISMS AND POSTMODERNISMS: ANTHROPOLOGY AND THE MANAGEMENT OF DIFFERENCE.
GERMAN LOCAL HISTORY AS METAPHOR AND SANCTION.
DANZA DE LA PLUMA: SYMBOLS OF SUBMISSION AND SEPARATION IN A MEXICAN FIESTA.
THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS A FIGURE OF HEGEMONY? AN INTRODUCTION.
FROM TEXT TO (FIELD)WORK AND BACK AGAIN: THEORIZING A POST(MODERN)-ETHNOGRAPHY.
GRINGO… GRINGITA
ACTING ON CONVICTION: RECLAIMING THE WORLD AND THE SELF THROUGH PERFORMANCE.
REPRESENTING CLASS: WHO DECIDES?
JOKING IN RESEARCHER-RESIDENT DIALOGUE: THE ETHNOGRAPHY OF HIERARCHY AMONG THE TUAREG.
TALKING ABOUT RESISTANCE: ETHNOGRAPHY AND THEORY IN RURAL FRANCE.
DARK TREMBLING: ETHNOGRAPHIC NOTES ON SECRECY AND CONCEALMENT IN HIGHLAND SULAWESI.
Financial deregulation in a global economy.
Economic challenges of the 1990s.
Rethinking the framework for monetary policy.
Traditional rulers and development administration: Chieftaincy in Niger, Nigeria, and Vanuatu.
Actual and expected deprivation: Northern Mexico in the 1980s. A research note.
Trade and development policies in Colombia: Export promotion and outward orientation, 1967-1992.
Neoliberal restructuring and scenarios of democratic consolidation in Latin America.
A mesolevel comparative approach to maxi and mini strategies of public enterprise reform.
Outside the den of dragons: The Philippines and the NICs of Asia.
The Brazilian military after the Cold War: In search of a mission.
Developing and financing housing and highway systems: Lessons from U.S. experience.
Geopolitics and geoculture in world-systems theorizing: A review essay.
Communes and kibbutzim: Past, present--and future? A review essay.
Pipeline access and market integration in the natural gas industry: Evidence from cointegration...
Energy consumption and economic activity in China.
Price, environmental regulation, and fuel demand: Econometric estimates for Japanese...
Deregulation and common carriage in the Nordic power system.
Global warming and urban smog: Cost-effectiveness of CAFE standards and alternative fuels.
The family contexts of marriage timing in Nepal.
Celebrating Nikolaus Day: Ideology and emotion in a German children's ritual.
Nuclear and joint family households in West Bengal villages.
Sexuality, power and social order in Cartagena, Colombia.
Exchange and social stratification in the Eastern Adriatic: A graph-theoretic model.
Dimensions of subsistence foraging in South India.
Muslim women traders of northern Nigeria: Perspectives from the city of Yola.
Uneven development in Western Guatemala.
African sacred kings: Expectations and performance in the Cameroon grassfields.
Prestations and affinity in a bilateral society: The Timugon Murut of Sabah, Malaysia.
Public oratory in Xhosa ritual: Tradition and change.
Ancient images of aging: Did ageism exist in Greco-Roman antiquity?
`And the Fear of thee Poorhouse': Perceptions of old age impoverishment in early twentieth...
Erik Erikson: Ages, stages, and stories.
Simone de Beauvoir: Prospects for the future of older women.
Cultural lags in social perceptions of the aged.
Images of old age in America 1790-1970--After a second look.
Air pollution in the valley of Mexico.
Model of urban tourism for small Caribbean islands.
The Litani River of Lebanon.
The 1931 Shippee-Johnson aerial photography expedition to Peru.
Changes in the French winescape.
Cultural geography and land trusts in Colorado and Utah.
Natural hazards in Peurto Rico.
Ecological disturbance and nature tourism.
Postmodern consequences.
The power of place and space.
Creating historic open space in Melaka.
A model of Indonesian city structure.
Political identity among Chinese in Thailand.
Tourism, change, and continuity in the Mount Everest Region, Nepal.
Regional depiction in contemporary film.
Geographical dimensions of the Shining Path insurgency in Peru.
The gilded age and the making of Bar Harbor.
What is spiritual geography?
Intrinsic value and landscape evaluation.
PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAUMAS AND DEPRESSION IN A SAMPLE OF VIETNAMESE PEOPLE IN THE UNITED STATES.
SUPPORT GROUPS AS OPEN SYSTEMS: A MODEL FOR PRACTICE AND RESEARCH.
RESIDENTIAL STATUS AND THE PHYSICAL HEALTH F A MENTALLY ILL POPULATION.
COMMUNITY BIOETHICS: THE HEALTH DECISIONS COMMUNITY COUNCIL.
ENHANCING REHABILITATION THROUGH MUTUAL AID: OUTREACH TO PEOPLE WITH RECENT AMPUTATIONS.
HEALTH CARE REFORM: OUR GREATEST OPPORTUNITY...EVER!
CHILDREN DON'T FORGET ME: A RESOURCE AND SUPPORT GROUP FOR DEPLOYED PARENTS DURING OPERATIONS DESERT SHIELD AND DESERT STORM.
MANAGED CARE AND MANAGED COMPETITION: A PRIMER FOR SOCIAL WORK.
HISPANIC CULTURE AND FAMILY CARE OF ALZHEIMER'S PATIENTS.
FAMILY STRESS AND RESOURCES: POTENTIAL AREAS OF INTERVENTION ON CHILDREN RECENTLY DIAGNOSED WITH DIABETES.
A content analysis of copy and advertisement photographs in Sport Illustrated and Sport: A...
Motivating students for learning in the gymnasium: The role of perception and meaning.
High school coaches of women's teams: An evaluation of burnout levels.
A framework for writing and evaluating critical performance cues in instructional material for...
Curricular effectiveness in promoting physical fitness in fifth and seventh grade students.
A comparison of the perceived teaching effectiveness of full-time faculty and coaches teaching...
An examination of a generic field experience from a physical education perspective.
Multicultural understanding in physical education: A comparison of urban and rural perspectives.
Physical Education Teacher Education (PETE): Innovation through infusion and integration.
America 2000: Implications for physical education.
Systematic observation training for preservice physical education teachers.
Educator role as related to practicing teachers: Focusing for the future.
Youth sports: Parental concerns.
ATNR: It's possible impact on motor efficiency on children.
Coaching behaviors: `The way you were, or the way you wished you were'.
A look back to the future.
Achieving professional competency in developmental physical activity: The need for a consensual...
A comparison of time in the training zone from two independent studies involving middle school...
Teaching concepts of body fatness while skinfold testing: An experimental test of different methods.
Teacher effectiveness in using direct instruction for student skill acquisition.
Effects of grading on achievement in college physical education.
Computer-aided analysis of sport performance: An example from soccer.
Job satisfaction and female college coaches.
Should hate be a crime?
The contraception paradox.
Anger and affability: The rise and representation of a repertory of self-presentation skills in a...
Knowing one's place: Perceptions of community in the industrial suburbs of Leeds, 1790-1890.
Agrarian rebellion and defense of community: Meaning and collective violence in late colonial and..
The rhetoric of death and destruction in the Thirty Years War.
`Whence comes the lady tympanist?' Gender and instrumental musicians in America, 1853-1990.
Following the rules? Women's responses to incarceration, New Zealand, 1880-1920.
Negotiating the `folk highway' of the nation: Sport, public culture and American identity, 1870-...
`Everyone's been good to me, especially the dogs'; Foster children and young paupers in...
The seeds of prosperity and discord: The political economy of community polarization in...
Equity, Quality, and Need in the Adult Family.
Positive or Negative Connotations of Unconventionally and Conventionally Spelled Names.
Gender Differences in Flashbulb Memories Elicited by the Clarence Thomas Hearings.
Frightening Information and Extraneous Arousal: Changing Cognitions and Behavior Regarding Nuclear War.
The Effect of Ethnic Threat on Ethnic Self-Concept and Own-Group Ratings.
Gender, Ethnicity, and the Structure of Self-Esteem: An Attitude Theory Approach.
Purism and Wilderness Campers.
Gender, Ethnic Group, and Homelessness as Predictors of Locus of Control Among Job Training Participants.
Turnover Among Hispanic and Non-Hispanic Blue-Collar Workers in the U.S. Navy's Civilian Work Force.
The Impact of Cooperative Learning on the Performance and Retention of U.S. Navy Air Traffic Controller Trainees.
Social Loafing and Personal Involvement Among Jordanian College Students.
Tenure, Commitment, and Satisfaction of College Graduates in an Engineering Firm.
Multiple Interpretations of the Rokeach Value Survey.
Privacy Dimensions and Preferences Among Turkish Students.
Judging Personality Traits of Adolescents From Photographs.
Individual Differences in Predicting Behavioral Intentions From Attitude and Subjective Norm.
Level of Interaction and Reciprocal Influence in Supportive and Critical Male Discussion Groups.
Impact of Cooperative and Individualistic Learning on High-Ability Students' Achievement, Self-Esteem, and Social Acceptance.
Attitudes Toward Institutional Authorities Among Aboriginal School Children in Australia.
Reactions of American Minority and Nonminority Students to the Persian Gulf War.
Attributions of Self-Esteem as a Function of Duration of Eye Contact.
Fear of Crime and the Likelihood of Victimization: A Bi-Ethnic Comparison.
The Relationship Between Parental Interest and Academic Achievement of Xhosa Children From Monogamous and Polygynous Families.
Adult participation in coed softball: Relations in a gender integrated sport.
Effect of goal difficulty on performance of aerobic, anaerobic and power tasks in laboratory and...
College graduation rates of student athletes and students attending college male basketball...
The effect of competition on young swimmers: Analysis of temporal details.
Conflict with baseball umpires: An observational study.
U.S. intervention in the Horn of Africa amidst the end of the Cold War. (cover story)
Ethiopia: Democracy and the politics of ethnicity.
Somalia: The painful road to reconciliation.
Guest editors' introduction: Health strategies for modern Africa.
Health care in twentieth century Africa: Statistics, theories, and policies.
Africa's population and family planning dynamics.
AIDS in Africa: A perspective on the epidemic.
Food and health: The Zambian experience.
The Akufo Akinyele Community Literacy and Health Project: A model of integrated development.
Perpetuating neo-colonialism through population control: South Africa and the United States.
Structural adjustment and Africa's democracy movements.
Development theory and the promise of Democracy: the future of postcolonial African states.
Democracy and democratization in Africa: A plea for pragmatic possibilism.
The future of global polarization.
The failed transition to civilian rule in Nigeria: Its implications for democracy and human rights.
Emigration from Irish ports.
Liverpool=the flood-gate of the old world: A study in ethnic attitudes.
`For the people who are not in a hurry': The Danish Thingvalla Line and the transportation of... ...
The traffic of emigration via Bremen/Bremerhaven: Merchants' interests, protective legislation...
Emigration traffic in the Port of Genoa between the nineteenth and twentieth centuries: Shipping...
Armenian refugee women: The picture brides, 1920-1930.
Profile of a pluralistic parish: Saint Peter's Roman Catholic Church, New York City, 1785-1815.
Historical constructions of ethnicity: Research on Punjabi immigrants in California.
Trends in research on Arab Americans.
Places important to Navajo people.
`The End' in James Welch's novels.
The economic impact of the 1837 and 1842 Chippewa treaties.
Southern studies in Australia and New Zealand.
Southern Studies in Japan.
Slavery, race and racism: The peculiarities and problems of Southern Studies in Nigeria.
Southern Studies in Great Britain.
Researching and teaching U.S. Southern History in Italy.
SHA International Committee register of scholars.
The South: A bibliographical essay.
The politics of international American Studies.
The outsider as marginal scholar: Reflections on the past, the foreign and comparative studies...
Postmodernism and the possibilities for representation.
Postmodernism and history.
Postmodernism and the discipline of drama/theater studies.
A proliferation of hypotheses: Postmodernism and literary studies.
Exploring American traditions: A survey of folklore and folklife research in American studies.
Ideology and the canon: British and American literature study in China.
Poe on the veld: Herman Charles Bosman's use of Edgar Allan Poe as a literary model.
Oil and the Gulf War: An `American century' or a `new world order'.
Will OPEC survive?
The impact of the gulf crisis on Jordan's economic infra-structure: A study of the responses of....
The Intifada: The emergence of embryonic legal mechanisms for Palestinian self-determination.
Development tasks for Arab gulf universities.
And life went on...in war-torn Lebanon.
The rhetoric of oil and the dilemma of war and American hegemony.
The Egyptian and Iranian Ulama at the threshold of modern social change: What does and what does....
Jordan: The ubiquitous partner--the Jordanian option resurrected.
Competing for friendship: The two Chinas and Saudi Arabia.
The painful transition from authoritarianism in Algeria.
Taiwan's foreign aid policy.
The crises of communism and the prospects for change in the People's Republic of China.
Nationalism, neo-authoritarianism, and political liberalism: Are they shaping political agendas...
The conduct of post-Tiananmen U.S. China policy: Domestic constraints, systemic change, and value...
Can NAFTA Change Mexico?
Oil: Reopening the Door.
The Battle for Egypt.
Freedom and Its Discontents.
Holding Together South Africa.
Forcing the spring.
THE NEW INTERVENTIONISTS.
QUEST FOR A POST-COLD WAR FOREIGN POLICY.
THE NEW EUROPE: YESTERDAY'S GHOSTS.
RUSSIA AND EASTERN EUROPE: WILL THE WEST LET THEM FAIL?
ASIA/PACIFIC CHALLENGES.
LATIN AMERICA: READY FOR PARTNERSHIP?
RETREAT FROM AFRICA.
DEBACLE IN SOMALIA.
The military regimes of Panama.
Panama: The difficult transition towards democracy.
Consolidation after imposition: Panama's 1992 referendum.
Impact of development on the Panama Canal environment.
The security of Panama and the Canal: Now and for the future.
The decline of US military influence in Latin America.
Deepening of democracy in a crisis setting: Political reforms and the electoral process in...
Germany and Latin America: A complex relationship.
The political economy of MERCOSUR.
Clinton's foreign drug policy.
Controversy and the teaching of authentic civic values. (cover story)
Civic education is values education. (cover story)
Moral and practical foundations for civic education. (cover story)
On the development of democratic citizens. (cover story)
The practice of citizenship: Learn by doing. (cover story)
Children and ethical conflict. (cover story)
Incorporating Caribbean immigration into the social studies curriculum.
Survival in the South Pacific: The new social studies in New Zealand.
Our Working World and the birth of the Organic Curriculum.
Economics for elementary school students.
Getting parents and students involved: Using survey and interview techniques.
Social history, the census, and the blues: A high school application.
Teaching about the Civil Rights movement by using student-generated comic books.
Teaching about religions in government/civics courses. (cover story)
Human rights orientation of prospective social studies teachers in Nigeria.
Can deviants be morally educated?
Educating for democracy: The close up story. (cover story)
Active civic learning for secondary school students. (cover story)
Helping teachers educate for democracy: Teacher programs and institutes. (cover story)
Classroom materials for civic education. (cover story)
America's youngest citizens: Close Up for grades 1-8. (cover story)
Educating special citizens. (cover story)
In retrospect: Sociological resources for the social studies curriculum project.
Untitled.
Masks and secrecy among the Chewa. (cover story)
John Muafangejo.
Tradition and innovation in African-American yards.
Two days in Mushenge.
The authenticity of Makonde art.
Senufo masking and the art of Poro.
Untitled.
The rural mosques of Futa Toro. (cover story)
Sculptures of the Njayei Society among the Mende.
Images of the Queen Mother in Benin Court art.
Pick up the phone.
Women's art as gender strategy among the We of Canton Boo.
Thrones of the orichas.
Why cylinder seals? Engraved cylindrical seal stones of the ancient Near East, fourth to first...
Concerning the `mechanical' parts of painting and the artistic culture of seventeenth-century...
Nicodemus and sculptors: Self-reflexivity in works by Adam Kraft and Tilman Riemenschneider.
Edvard Munch's Self-Portrait with Cigarette: Smoking and the Bohemian persona.
Vincent van Gogh's paintings of olive trees and cypresses from St.-Remy.
Resisting narrative: The problem of Edgar Degas's Interior.
Painted promises: The politics of public art in late nineteenth-century France.
Policy statements: Plain and fancy.
Selecting activities in the arts for early childhood education.
Art as socially constructed narrative: Implications for early childhood education.
Creative drama and young children: The dramatic learning connection.
Three orientations to arts in the primary grades: Implications for curriculum reform.
The evolution and future of cognitive research in music.
Grade-level assessment in the arts: Of stoppages and stratagems.
Art as intelligent activity.
Introduction to the symposium on aesthetic value and arts education.
The good of art.
The place of art in the education of feeling.
Aesthetic value in cross-cultural, multicultural art study.
Instilling aesthetic values.
Playwriting in the K-12 curriculum: A catalyst for educational reform.
Naming the passion.
Creativity and dance: Implications for pedagogy and policy.
Taking responsibility: Higher education's opportunity to affect the future of the arts in the...
New works for young audiences: A call for courage and craft.
New work in dance education.
An open letter on standards.
Encontrados afectos: El Senor de Bembibre as a self-conscious novel.
On the evolution of Spanish ciguena and the blending of multiple variants.
Chivalry, symbolism and psychology in Cervantes' Knight of the Green Cloak.
Peter Guyon Earle.
Tributes to Peter G. Earle.
Alarcon's El dueno de las estrellas: Hero and pharmakos.
Glorious invalid: Spanish theater in the nineteenth century.
The Ibero-Romance reflexes of Greco-Latin Syringa.
The politics of Piety: Manuscript illumination and narration in the `Cantigas De Santa Maria'.
Between delirium and luminosity: Larra's ethical nightmare.
El esperpento de Mosen Millan: A reflection of Valle-Inclan in Sender.
The devil at heaven's door: Metaphysical desire in Don Juan Tenorio.
Contemplating your own novel: The case of Mario Vargas LLosa.
Press-government relations in Mexico: A study of freedom of the Mexican press and press criticism...
Early Mexican radio broadcasting: Media imperialism, state paternalism, or Mexican nationalism?
Disjointed frames: Melodrama, nationalism, and representation in 1940s Mexico.
Musical style, migration, and urbanization: Some considerations on Brazilian musica sertaneja...
Television culture: The Dominican case.
`Eddie' Chibas: The `magic bullet' of Cuban radio.
Dominican popular music under the Trujillo dictatorship.
Las hojas sueltas [broadsides]: Nineteenth-century Chilean popular poetry as a source for the...
Between the nation and utopia: The image of Mexico in the films of Emilio `Indio' Fernandez.
Feminine perspectives on journalism: Conversations with eight Mexican women.
Browsing.
Arts advocacy in music education.
More than music.
Balancing space and energy in choral voices.
The computer in instrumental music.
AP music theory in your school.
Music instruction and the hearing impaired.
Research in music teacher education.
MENC today.
Keyboard instruction in the music classroom.
Elementary music with synthesizers.
Success with keyboards in middle school.
Upbeat advice for downbeat teachers.
College musicianship.
The challenge of integrated curricula.
The musical elements.
Justifying music education.
Implications of national standards.
Creativity and the marching band.
Teacher burnout the dull reality.
How to select timpani literature.
Effective strategies for praising students.
Children's choirs.
Untitled.
A stronger rationale for music education.
Teaching all students to sing on pitch.
Improvisation for global musicianship.
A survival kit for new music teachers.
Aesthetic criticism in the music classroom.
Continuing education with Elderhostel.
Bringing the past into music classrooms.
National Standards for Arts Education.
The long and the short of it.
Beyond what meets the eye: The photographic analogy in Cortazar's short stories.
A poetics of immediacy: Oral narrative and the short story.
Reality in the modern short story.
The `feminine' short story: Recuperating the moment.
Bakhtin and his circle: A checklist of English translations.
Aspects of verse study: Linguistic prosody, versification, rhythm, verse experience.
Theoretical feminisms: Subjectivity, struggle, and the `conspiracy' of poststructuralisms.
Recent work in critical theory.
Up in arms: Defending the patriarchy in Pixerecourt's Charles le Temeraire.
Of mothers and freedom: Adela's struggle for selfhood in La Casa de Bernarda Alba.
Aging by default: Frederic Moreau and his times in Flaubert's Sentimental Education.
The vision of Paris in the Recuerdos de Viaje of Ramon de Mesonero Romanos.
PREDATORS AND PARASITES IN LE PÈRE GORIOT.
FADING IMAGES: THE TOURISTIC ITINERARY AND SPATIAL REPRESENTATION IN CÉLINE'S GERMAN TRILOGY.
THE TEXT AS AN OBJECT: FRANCIS PONGE'S VERBAL STILL LIFES.
RÓMULO GALLEGOS'S DOñNA BÁRBARA: TOWARD A RADICAL REREADING.
Two paths for Ginsburg.
Reasonable doubts.
Crumbling fortress.
Taking the computer cure.
Battle of the quotes.
Against all odds.
Workaholism.
Impressions.
A new test.
The quest for TQM.
Making the right choice.
Buried memories shattered lives.
What tax reform means for you and your client.
Benchmarks.
Impressions.
ABE 1993 annual report.
The second woman justice.
Not-so-big issues.
The courtship of Byron White. (cover story)
Perspectives on White : A roundtable.
How long is too long?
Timmmberr!
Remembering Nuremberg.
What is double jeopardy?
Alienation.
Vox populi.
Political correctness and the first amendment: The false threat.
Don't leave home without it...Your office, that is.
Avoid malpractice automate.
Reaping the whirlwind.
The Chimera of Industrial Policy: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow.
Trade Policy Aspects of Industrial Policy in the U.S.
Trade Policy Aspects of Industrial Policy In Canada.
Japanese Industrial Policy: What Is It, and Has It Worked?
Reevaluating The Chicago School Paradigm For Promoting Innovation and Competitiveness.
The Role of Competition Policy in Canada's Industrial Policy.
The People Factor in Industrial Policy.
New Developments in Establishing A National Training Approach in Canada.
Industrial Policy In A Federal Structure: State Industrial Policy In the United States.
The Challenge of Technology Competitiveness in the United States.
The Canadian Challenge--Tools of Industrial Policy.
Financing Innovation.
Tax Incentives and Innovation: The Canadian Treatment of R&D.
Toward An Industrial National Policy: Does The European Community Provide A Useful Guide?
An Industrial Policy Tax System?
Tax Policy and Industrial Policy.
Recipe for Industrial Policy: Blending Environmentalism and International Competitiveness.
Industrial Policy and Environmental Regulation--Canada.
Regulating municipal solid waste incinerators under the clean air act: History, technology and...
The oil pollution act's criminal penalties: On a collision course with the law of the sea.
Strange things are afoot at the Circle K: Agency action against leased sites in environmental...
The mass media and democracy.
The media's role in U.S. foreign policy.
Transnational media: Creating consumers worldwide.
Toward a NWICO for the twenty-first century?
Democratization and forces in the African media.
The press and power in the Russian Federation.
Terrorism and censorship: The media in chains.
Public relations and international affairs: Effects, ethics and responsibility.
Eclipse of reason: The media in the Muslim world.
The market versus the state: The Chinese press since Tiananmen.
Living dangerously: Issues of Peruvian press freedom.
Setting a new agenda for the United Nations.
Collective security in Europe after the Cold War.
The New York Court of Appeals: An old tradition struggles with current issues.
State constitutions, criminal justice, and California's strange odyssey.
The Second Amendment and American federalism: A view from the states.
Tilling the field of interest group research: An overview of new insights.
Political passions and the creation of the American national community: The case of Alexander...
Which Machiavelli?
Fin de siecle federalism: The Supreme Court and the redistribution of constitutional power.
State constitutionalism: Completing the interdisciplinary study of constitutional law and...
Teaching civil liberties: The missing dimension.
Standardized teaching evaluations.
Some thoughts about standardized teaching evaluations.
Student evaluation of faculty: A faculty perspective.
Thoughts on the lesser evil: Student evaluations.
Managing good teaching.
What student evaluations teach.
The West's mismanagement of the Yugoslav crisis.
Who's to blame for the war in ex-Yugoslavia?
In defense of the Bosnian Republic.
American and German approaches to East Central Europe: A comparison.
Churchill in 1940: Myth and reality.
Bosnia and the future of ethnic cleansing.
The U.S. military and peacekeeping operations.
The U.S. role in peacekeeping-related activities.
Gorbachev's Eurasian strategy.
Latin America: Democracy and the market are not enough.
Officials discuss revolutionary movements' future.
Post-totalitarianism in Eastern Germany and German democracy.
The search for a negotiated peace.
`Exclusive' comments by Abimael Guzman.
The role of minor political parties in Taiwan.
Taiwan's new media: Its role in democratization.
Taiwan and mainland: A comparison on democratization.
Conduct disorder and attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity in child inpatients: Comparisons on home and hospital measures.
Lag sequential analysis as a tool for functional analysis of student disruptive behavior in...
The assessment of depression in children: Are we assessing depression or the broad-band construct...
Systems change and services for students with emotional/behavioral disabilities in Kentucky.
Influences on teacher referral of children to mental health services: Gender, severity, and...
Substance use prevention and students with behavioral disorders: Guidelines for school professionals
Externalizing behavior in the life course: The transition from school to work.
Test-taking strategy instruction for adolescents with emotional and behavioral disorders.
Prereferral intervention for students with emotional or behavioral risks: Use of a behavioral...
A 1-year follow-up of a preventive program for high-risk transfer children.
The social behavior and peer relations of emotionally and behaviorally disturbed students in...
Identifying and assessing the job-related social skills of adolescents and young adults with...
Further evaluation of inpatient child behavior ratings: Consistency across settings, time, and...
An assessment of exposure to cyclohexylamine arising from steam humidification of indoor air.
Cancer incidence and community exposure to air emissions from petroleum and chemical plants in...
Radon reduction: A three year follow-up.
A survey of carbon monoxide and nitrogen dioxide in indoor ice arenas in Vermont.
EPA's strategy to reduce risk of radon.
Aeromicrobiology: An assessment of a new meat research complex.
Aquaculture and mobile fish processing.
Systematic planning enhances the effectiveness of retail food regulatory programs.
Temporary public eating places: Food safety knowledge, attitudes and practices.
An outbreak of Salmonella javiana associated with consumption of watermelon.
Electronic mail strategies for environmental health.
Uniform Environmental Health Code: A modern management tool for progress.
The influence of an educational fact sheet on small system water supplier attitudes toward the....
Controlling public health nuisances: Guidelines for local health departments.
Phenol removal by soil adsorption with activated sludge addition.
Water, water everywhere...and not a drop to drink.
Measuring source reduction of laboratory hazardous wastes.
Household hazardous waste disposal in Benton County, Oregon.
Prediction of vulnerable zones for reactive substances.
Childhood lead poisoning near abandoned lead mining and smelting areas: A case study of two....
Organochlorine pesticides in adipose tissue of persons from El Paso, Texas.
Universities as resources to state environmental agencies.
A computerized program to educate adults about environmental health risks.
The blob: Investigating the abnormal.
Corporate environmentalism: Cooperation or co-optation?
The quiet revolution advancing the environmental professional NEHA Annual Educational Conference...
Compensation self restraint and self-preservation.
Puzzling out the mysteries of health insurance benefits.
Total quality management in the HMO environment.
A trend analysis of financial accounts.
Helping physicians cope with RBRVS.
The new healthcare audit guide.
Pay for performance in hospitals.
Reducing costs: Who really wants to?
Cancer program development: Is your hospital ready?
Stigmatization of the psychiatric patient: Future perspectives...
Variables in effective CEO-medical director relations.
Managing hospital quality performance in two related...
Building better backs.
Nursing administrators' responses to physically, mentally...
Healthcare reform: A contrarian's view.
Organizational leadership in hospitals.
Increasing the effectiveness of healthcare managers.
Creating a satisfying practice setting for physicians.
Achieving smoke-free hospitals.
Information technology and managed care.
How immigration laws affect hospitals.
Quality improvement naysayers.
Health care politics.
A needs assessment of sick-child care benefits for nurses.
Laying the groundwork for a smooth transition to TQM.
Does planning pay off?
Cost appropriateness: Can we $Afford$ another medical...
Venous thrombosis due to poor anticoagulant response to activated protein C: Leiden...
Respiratory syncytial virus or influenza?
Hippocampal sclerosis in epilepsy and childhood febrile seizures.
Direct impacts in cities.
Critical conditions, a profile of Honduras.
Primary management of carcinoma of the breast.
Field tests for rational drug use in twelve developing countries.
Normal and shear stresses on a residual limb in a prosthetic socket during ambulation...
Modelling the mechanics of narrowly contained soft tissues: The effects of specification of...
Basic gait parameters: Reference data for normal subjects, 10-79 years of age.
Characterization of the dynamic stress response of manual and powered wheelchair frames.
Design of a composite monocoque frame racing wheelchair.
Analysis of sweat during soft tissue breakdown following pressure ischemia.
Preferred frequency response for two- and three-channel amplification systems.
Do adaptive frequency response (AFR) hearing aids reduce `upward spread' of masking?
Effects of prolonged lack of amplification on speech-recognition performance: Preliminary findings.
High-frequency testing techniques and instrumentation for early detection of ototoxicity.
Development and use of auditory compact discs in auditory evaluation.
The drama of the college wars.
Stephen Greenblatt's new historicist vision.
`Misconduct' in science: Quis custodiet ipsos custodes.
The goddess and the academy.
PC on stage.
Politicization: From the law schools to the courts.
Clio in 2013: The writing and teaching of history in the next twenty years.
Time bandits among the intelligentsia: Russian parables for the American academy.
Ethnic studies and American higher education.
The changing literature curriculum in K-12.
Is there a woman's perspective in literature?
The mission of the university: Intellectual discovery or social transformation.
Dealing in Russia.
Science in trouble.
`One very simple principle'?
Modeling my father.
The fate of a story.
Human morality and animal research. (cover story)
Iatrogenic government. (cover story)
Orange juice with General Peron. (cover story)
How to join the middle classes. (cover story)
The ladies of Observatory Hill. (cover story)
Oyez a Beaumont.
Max Frisch: The courage of failure.
A question of child abuse.
Tyranny and faction in the Federalist papers.
Being well-lost in film.
Moonstruck.
Nosferatu.
Against apocalyptic history: Counterlives, prosaics, and the lessons of the quotidian.
Contingency for beginners.
The Presence in the desert.
Jung, gnosis, and faith refused.
Nobody knows my name.
The return of `Selves'.
Forgetting in order to find: The self in Thomas Merton's poetry.
Voices of my selves.
Working through images.
Christianity and the survival of creation.
Borowitz and the postmodern renewal of theology.
Faith communities in the academic world.
The once and future university.
Jewishness and Judaism at Brandeis University.
Fundamentalism and higher education at Wheaton College.
Quaker principles in the crucible of practice.
Catholic higher education today--The challenges of ambiguity.
Preserving the lifeworld, restoring the public sphere, renewing higher education.
On the necessity and impossibility of being a Jew in the academy.
`To count how few our days'.
Gender differences in reasoning ability measured by letter series items.
A management skills audit for future managers.
Personality through metaphor: Optimism, pessimism, locus of control, and sensation seeking.
Public self-attention and personal standards: The impact of group composition.
Procedural justice and preferential treatment: A brief review and comment.
The development of moral beliefs: A retrospective study.
Perceived homogeneity and familial loyalty between Chinese and Americans.
How efficacious, caring Samaritans cope when their help is rejected unexpectedly.
Psychological effects of sustained shipboard operations on U.S. Navy personnel.
Stress and coping: The Loma Prieta earthquake.
Male attractiveness: Masculinity with a feminine touch.
Limbic networks and associative learning: II. Entorhinal contributions to spontaneous...
Honorable intentions versus praiseworthy accomplishments: The impact of motives and outcomes on...
On the disunity of the self: A systems theory of personality.
Meta-analytic studies of leadership: Added insights or added paradoxes?
Creative thinking abilities and hemispheric asymmetry in schizotypal college students.
Conceptual level and therapeutic responsiveness among counselor trainees.
Regimes of Nature.
Rituals of Restoration.
Restoration or Preservation.
A Storm Blowing from Paradise.
The new social Darwinism.
Saint Martin of Tours and the new world of public policy.
The bishops lobby.
Being in control: A note on differences between caregiving and noncaregiving spouses.
Perceptions of excessive alcohol consumption in stressful and nonstressful situations among...
The relationship between childhood onset obesity and psychopathology in adulthood.
The viable human.
Turning of the tide.
Deep ecology and the Council of All Beings.
Tao how? Asian religions and the problem of environmental degradation.
The Buddhist path and social responsibility.
Human survival: A psycho-evolutionary analysis.
Science, spirituality, and the present world crisis.
An introduction to the spiritual/transpersonal path for the scientifically `handicapped'.
The thirst for wholeness: Addiction and the spiritual path.
The western mind at the threshold.
Synchronicity and the Tao: Mysticism, metaphor, morphic fields, and the quest for meaning.
The spiritual mission of America.
The UFO abduction phenomenon: What might it mean for the evolution of human consciousness?
River of truth.
Apocatastasis in patristic theology.
Development in moral doctrine.
Public religious dialogue: The economic pastoral and the hermeneutics of democracy.
David Tracy's theological project: An overview and some implications.
The Summae Confessorum on the integrity of confession as prolegomena for Luther and Trent.
Herman Schell and the reform of the Catholic Church in Germany.
The Christianization of modern philosophy according to Maurice Blondel.
Melding War and Politics in Namibia: South Africa's Counterinsurgency Campaign, 1966-1989.
From Counterrevolutionary Warfare To Political Awakening: The Uruguayan and Argentine Armed Forces in the 1970s.
The Druze Minority in the Israeli Military: Traditionalizing an Ethnic Policing Role.
Chinese Women in the People's Liberation Army: Professionals or Quasi-Professionals?
Israeli Responses to the Threat of Chemical Warfare.
Winged Defense: Airwar, The Law, and Morality.
The Relationship between Demographic Variables and Intent to Stay in the Military: Medical Personnel in a U.S. Air Force Hospital.
Management of Budgetary Decline in the Department of Defense in Response to the End of the Cold War.
A New Paradigm for Military Policy: Socioeconomics.
Military Spending and Economic Growth in Taiwan.
Shaping the New World Order: America's Post-Gulf War Agenda in the Middle East.
The great flood of 1993.
Test-tube survival of the molecularly fix.
The evolution of viviparity in lizards.
Environmental refugees in a globally warmed world.
Training developing-country nationals is the critical ingredient to conserving global biodiversity.
Is human culture carcinogenic for uncontrolled population growth and ecological destruction?
Feminism and the study of animal behavior.
Can there be a standardized format for literature citations?
We need a revolution--teaching biology for the twenty-first century.
Untitled.
Madagascar's mysterious aye-ayes.
Social climate forces women out of science.
Biological control of purple loosestrife. (cover story)
The logic of livestock and deforestation in Amazonia.
Inheritance of acquired characteristics revisited.
Being a scientist means taking sides.
A case study of supplemental instruction in biology focused on at-risk students.
Scientific standards.
Sea dwellers and their sidekicks.
Blue behemoth bounds back.
Population control in symbiotic corals.
Implementing ecosystem-based management.
The challenge of the Mississippi flood. (cover story)
Obstacles to environmental protection.
Exploring the links between desertification and climate change. (cover story)
Research lessons from acid rain, ozone depletion, and global warming.
Revitalizing the Clean Water Act.
Of global concern.
Reconciling rural communities and resource conservation.
Environmental equity and the need for government intervention: Two proposals.
Zero Population Growth.
An action plan to clean up the Baltic. (cover story)
Popular epidemiology challenges the system.
In praise of superfund.
Environmental equity.
The global need for environmental education.
Environment and economy. (cover story)
Rain forest entrepreneurs.
Tackling urban CO2 emissions in Toronto.
Entity-Relationship and Relational Database Modeling Representations for the Audit Review of Accounting Applications: An Experimental Examination of Effectiveness.
The Impact of Expert System Audit Tools on Auditing Firms in the Year 2001: A Delphi Investigation.
Journal of Information Systems: An Examination of the First Five Years.
Implementing a Graduate Management Consulting Course.
Fisheries and marine resources of Hawaii and the U.S.-associated Pacific Islands: An introduction.
Hawaii's marine fisheries: Some history, long-term trends, and recent developments.
Biology and management of deepwater snappers of the Hawaiian archipelago.
The lobster and shrimp fisheries in Hawaii.
An ecological perspective on inshore fisheries in the main Hawaiian islands.
Precious coral fisheries of Hawaii and the U.S. Pacific Islands.
The development and decline of Hawaii's skipjack tuna fishery.
Hawaii's pelagic fisheries.
Temporal and spatial distribution of catches of tiger sharks, Galeocerdo cuvier, in the Pelagic...
Comparisons of shark catch rates on longlines using rope/steel (Yankee) and monofilament gangions.
Inhibition of protease activity in muscle extracts and surimi from Pacific whiting, Merluccius...
Charter and party boat operators in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico: A social structure perspective.
A social and economic characterization of the U.S. Gulf of Mexico recreational shark fishery.
A review of recent developments in the world sea cucumber fisheries.
A cooperative management solution to a fishery commons.
Pacific hagfish, Eptatretus stouti, and black hagfish, E. deani: The Oregon fishery and port...
New products.
Picture this: Visualization tools for CAD drawings.
Voyage to the bottom of the sea.
Tunneling under the channel.
The return of the boomerang.
Ensuring spin test safety.
Controlling shock and vibration in electronic products.
Some glimpses from my career.
One woman's journey.
Discrimination in the workplace: Results of two recent surveys and some recommendations.
Women worldwide in astronomy.
The Andromeda Galaxy.
NGC 4550: A two-way galaxy.
Galactic cannibals, naked stars, MACHOs, smurfs, and other astronomy news.
Arthur Stanley Eddington: The nineteenth Bruce medalist.
To catch a ghost.
Astronomy Camp: Adventures in scientific research.
Polar ring galaxies: Interactions and mergers frozen in time. (cover story)
The last observatory on earth.
Henry Norris Russell: The twentieth Bruce medalist.
The search goes on.
Bringing the cosmos to the people: Planetarium education in the 1990s.
Stellar occulations during upcoming lunar eclipse.
Writ in Guaymi Blood.
Four Metaphors in Three Generations.
Rock Bluff, Florida.
Hail to Thee, Papa Bear.
Last Stand in the Sand.
The Kiwi's Parental Burden. (cover story)
The Rise of the British Wedding Cake.
The Look of Food.
Who Are the Jews?
The Sexual Politics of Classification.
In the Belly of the Bird.
Damming the Past. (cover story)
Telltale Tattoos in Russian Prisons.
A Goddess Unveiled.
Coffee, Tea, or Opium?
A Cheddar Aesthetic.
Ants That Pay the Piper.
The Razumovsky Duet.
The Allure of Symmetry.
When Leaves Save the Tree.
THE FUNDAMENTAL PHYSICAL CONSTANTS.
CEBAF readies its electron beam for studies of nucleons and nuclei. (cover story)
The physics job market: Bleak for young physicists.
Initial employment of physics doctorate recipients: Class of 1992.
IRIS and other open seismic networks could be crucial to test-ban regime.
STM rounds up electron waves at the qm corral.
IUPAC/IUPAP committee mediates custody battle over heavy elements.
Atom motion on surfaces.
Physics, community and the crisis in physical theory.
The XXIV Physics Olympiad examinations.
MRS turns 20 at the fall meeting in Boston.
Congress cancels SSC and allocates high budgets for technology in 1994.
Physical Review centenary--from basic research to high technology.
Physical Review records the birth of the laser era.
Fiber optics.
Early magnetic resonance experiments: Roots and offshoots.
Nuclear magnetic resonance in bulk matter.
Superconductivity: From physics to technology.
A semicentury of semiconductors.
Exploring mesoscopia: The bold new world of nanostructures.
Medical cyclotrons.
AVS to celebrate its 40th year at Orlando meeting.
Aid for FSU science quicker to come from societies than governments.
Earthquake yields first real evidence of remote triggering.
Photovoltaics: Unlimited electrical energy from the sun.
Boltzmann's entropy and time's arrow.
The 1993 International Physics Olympiad. (cover story)
Choices for DOD, Energy and Commerce mostly familiar faces in R&D policy.
At April meeting, APS and AAPT recognize outstanding work.
How to write an article for PSA journal.
Print display rack.
The making of an exhibition.
PSA International Conference of Photography in and around Atlanta.
1993 awards and honors recipients.
A photographic study of local culture.
Untitled.
Infrared: A different approach to photography.
Canoeing the Verde.
Photography on the run in Malaysia.
Untitled.
A road less traveled: Imprinting young minds with photography.
Portraiture in the studio.
Hyperfocal distance revisited.
The colors of black light.
Slide titles with your computer.
Synchronizing cameras for 3-D action photography.
Photographic know how on tap.
Stereo.
News notes.
News notes.
Biome sweet home.
How to stock your pond.
News notes.
Interpreting scores from standardized tests.
Applications of conventional and non-restrictive multiple-choice examination items.
Using standardized test results as an instructional guide.
Meeting student needs through the levels program and grade weighting.
The transition period in restructuring high schools: Teachers as leaders.
The Family and Medical Leave Act and the public school teacher.
`Collective creation': A multidisciplinary drama program.
Factors in the successful establishment of school-based clinics.
How to create discipline problems.
The current policy debate in school finance: Why does it matter?
The finances of poor school districts.
Tracking the changing pattern of school district expenditures in New York State.
Conditions of employment for teachers in the United States.
School finance reform in Michigan.
Finances and the problems of America's school buildings.
Do America's schools need a `Dow Jones Index'?
How teachers and students view the task of report writing.
Maximizing learning through youth apprenticeship programs.
The constitutionality of public school community service programs.
TQ in academe: Lessons from big business.
A magnet for homeless students: The Thomas J. Pappas Regional Education Center.
The greenhouse effect: A work experience course for reluctant learners.
Students serving students: A dropout-prevention program.
Evaluation of magnet schools: Methodological issues and concerns.
Are school districts overserving the disabled under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act?
`Act well your part' teachers and the performing arts.
Responsibilities and strategies of successful mentors.
Cartoon poetry: An approach to learning language.
Application of HIV/AIDS information to realistic situations: Ethics and life.
Student assessment: The project method revisited.
The education of Alice and Dorothy: Helping girls to thrive in school.
Personnel evaluation in education: A model for job-specific criteria.
More time and choices overcome students' resistance to reading.
Understanding and preventing acts of aggression and violence in school-age children and youth.
When community colleges change their presidents.
An inquiry into the role of the male spouse.
The successful community college instructor: A profile for recruitment.
The de facto state of general education: A study of Michigan community colleges.
Environmental scanning through a community needs assessment.
A review of the literature on tourism education and institutional linkages.
A review of the literature related to economic development and community colleges.
Graduate preparation programs in community college education.
Calculating student transfer rates: The Transfer Assembly project.
Project EXCEL: An integrated multidisciplinary undergraduate program.
The university learning center.
The writing program and center.
The center for excellence in oral communication.
The mathematics learning center.
The science learning center.
The cross-cultural/language technology center.
From title III evaluation to university assessment: Outcome, process, and impact program evaluation.
Project EXCEL: Challenges, victories and the future through institutionalization.
The effects of instructor involvement on student evaluations of college courses.
Influence of cognitive, linguistic, and sociocultural factors on literacy and biliteracy in young...
Improving teaching and learning through peer coaching.
Effective teaching practices.
Russian schools and the legacies of the Soviet era.
A multicultural social studies curriculum.
Professional portfolios for the beginning teacher.
A cafeteria approach to mentor teacher programs.
Training the student to be a reflective practitioner.
Cognitive counseling in criminal justice.
Principles of learning: A review.
Teacher/student dyadic interaction with emotionally disturbed youth.
Teacher praise: What students want.
Grandparent volunteers in the school: Building a partnership.
Learning and control in the classroom.
Young children's interpretations of coloring activities.
Mathematics anxiety and alternative methods of evaluation.
Analytical psychology, constructivism, and education.
An evaluation of the use of content-relevant cartoons as a teaching device.
Discipline that motivates.
The relationship between Myers-Briggs personality type and mathematics anxiety among preservice...
`Pearls of Wisdom': Enhancing student class participation with an innovative exercise.
The effects of field experiences on the attitudes of teacher education students.
Public elementary schooling: Some undesirable changes.
The relationship between National Board Scores (Part I) of physicians and certain attitudinal...
Gifted school performance and creativity.
Social support systems and the disadvantaged gifted: A framework for developing programs and...
Introduction to the mini-series: Diverse learners and prevailing, emerging, and research-based...
Improving general education instruction: Relevance to school psychologists.
Will the real school psychologist please stand up: Is the past a prologue for the future of...
Will the real school psychologist please stand up: Is the past a prologue for the future of...
Will the real school psychologist please stand up: Is the past a prologue for the future of...
Will the real school psychologist please stand up: Is the past a prologue for the future of...
Will the real school psychologist please stand up: Is the past a prologue for the future of...
A critical appraisal of the NASP's first 25 years.
Core profile types for the WISC-III and WIAT: Their development and application in identifying...
Wechsler subtest analysis: The right way, the wrong way, or no way?
Confirming a performance-based instructional model.
Behavior consultation with parents: Using competency-based training to modify child noncompliance.
School district testing policies and students with disabilities: A national survey.
ENGENDERING NATIONALISM: IDENTITY, DISCOURSE, AND THE MEXICAN CHARRO.
UNTANGLING THE MEANINGS OF HAIR IN TURKISH SOCIETY.
The changing roles of free economic zones in development: A comparative analysis of capitalist...
Organized labor under military rule: The Nigerian labor movement, 1985-1992.
Surviving in Rondonia: The dynamics of colonist farming strategies in Brazil's Northwest frontier.
The political economy of development: An empirical analysis of the effects of the institutional...
Growth with pollution: Unsustainable development in Taiwan and its consequences.
Modelling Peruvian debt rescheduling in the 1980s.
Politics versus culture: Which is stronger?
Economics vs. values in political trust in Korea.
When politics matter: Economic stabilization in Argentina and Israel.
AIDS costs in Trinidad and Tobago.
Marriage regulation and the rhetoric of alliance in Northwestern Turkey.
The disintegration of caste and changing concepts of Indian ethnic identity in Mauritius.
Savor slowly: Ekiben - the fast food of high-speed Japan.
The existential status of the Pakistani farmer: Studying official constructions of social reality.
The mayete as object and stereotype in Andalusian proletarian poetry.
Precolonial New Guinea trade.
Settlement and society among the Mountain Arapesh.
Ethnicity embodied: Evidence from Tahiti.
Spatial meaning in Andean festivals: Corpus Christi and Octavo.
Alcohol, community, and modernity: The social organization of toddy drinking in a Polynesian...
The thief-searching (leba shay) institution in Aariland, Southwest Ethiopia, 1890s-1930s.
`Dead end' work or motivating job? Prospects for frontline paraprofessional workers in LTC.
Roses and onions: The fruits of helping old and dying people.
On the home front: The job of the home aide.
Bed, body, and soul: The job of the nursing home aide.
A political economy perspective on frontline workers in long-term care.
Good work and good care in nursing homes.
The homecare worker: On the frontline of quality.
Looking ahead at homecare: An employer's perspective.
Homecare consortium addresses frontline worker issues.
Will new settings offer better work environments for paraprofessionals?
Consumer choice and the frontline worker.
Ethics and the frontline care worker: Mapping the subject.
Reaching a right and good decision: Ethical decision-making and the frontline...
Innovative work-force initiatives for long-term-care paraprofessionals: A resource directory.
Old-age-based rationing: From rhetoric to risk?
Protection for nursing facility residents under the ADA.
Physician-assisted dying: Fashioning public policy with an absence of data.
Mediation: Reframing care conflicts in nursing home.
Mediation for ethics committees: A promising process.
Medical futility and aging: Ethical implications.
Medical futility: Can we talk?
The power of an icon.
The city and human speech.
Structural models in the subterranean world.
Forgotten hardwood forests of the coastal plain.
Urban-system evolution in frontier settings.
Environmental degradation in the uplands of Cebu.
Agroclimatic hazards and dairy farming in Wisconsin.
Preservation choices at Muir Woods.
Nineteenth-century coastal gales of Southern California.
Cartography and empire building in nineteenth-century West Africa.
Social relevance and geographical research.
Fruticulture and uneven development in Northeast Brazil.
Chicago's other suburbs.
Land and water policies in the Sacramento-San Joaquin delta.
The piazza in Italian urban morphology.
Taboo and time-work experience in Madagascar.
Making the socialist city of Zanzibar.
Geographical record.
D-day and geography.
A CLOSER LOOK AT SOCIAL SUPPORT AS A MODERATOR OF STRESS IN BREAST CANCER.
FUNCTIONAL STATUS OF LONG-TERM BREAST CANCER SURVIVORS: Demonstrating Chronicity.
ALZHEIMER'S CARE AND SERVICE UTILIZATION: Generating Practice Concepts from Empirical Findings and Narratives.
FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO THE EARLY REHOSPITALIZATION OF ELDERLY PEOPLE.
EVALUATION OF A CORPORATE-SPONSORED HEALTH CARE PROGRAM FOR RETIRED EMPLOYEES.
COMPONENTS OF JOB SATISFACTION IN PYSCHIATRIC SOCIAL WORKERS.
STRENGTHENING SOCIAL NETWORKS: Intervention Strategies for Mental Health Case Managers.
CONFIDENTIALITY AFTER TARASOFF.
Health Care Reform and Long-Term Care: Uneasy Political Partners.
A HIGH-RISK SCREEN FOR PSYCHIATRIC DISCHARGE PLANNING.
FAMILIES OF CHRONICALLY MENTALLY ILL PATIENTS: Their Structure, Coping Resources, and Tolerance for Deviant Behavior.
MENTAL HEALTH UNDER NATIONAL HEALTH CARE REFORM: The Empirical Foundations.
SUPPORTS FOR COMMUNITY-BASED MENTAL HEALTH CARE: An Optimistic Review of Federal Legislation.
Social Work Delivery of Hospital-Based Financial Assistance Services.
Patient Rights and Dying: Policy Restraint and the States.
Adolescent athletes' perceived sport competence and motives for individual sports.
An analysis of secondary student preferences towards physical education.
Parents and coaches: Expectations, attitudes and communication.
Video and the physical education curriculum: Creative classroom applications.
A code of ethics for physical education majors.
Origins of the teacher-coach role: Idealism, convenience, and unworkability.
1980-1990, a decade of change: Undergraduate professional enrollments in the Southwest.
Children's views of their third grade physical education class.
Who was the student here? Reflections on teaching behavior.
Moving towards an acceptance of females in coaching.
Benefits, limitations, and implications of collaborative research among...
The effect of physical education curriculum development on the instructional...
Sport for all: A declaration of rights of individuals with disabilities...
Athletic participation and self-image: Are male and female athletes reaping similar benefits?
Longitudinal study of obesity and athletic competence.
In short supply: Ethnic minority doctorates in physical education.
An investigation of participant enjoyment in the physical activity instructional setting.
From ritual to science: The medical transformation of circumcision in America.
Inventing the African family: Gender and family law reform in Cote D'Ivoire.
A failed settler society: Marriage and demographic failure in early Jamaica.
The cultural significance of breastfeeding and infant care in early modern England and America.
Age relations and the social order in early New England: The evidence from manners.
`Dreams never to be realized': Emotional culture and the phenomenology of emotion.
Suburbanization and the decline of Catholic public ritual in Pittsburgh.
The student as strikebreaker: College youth and the crisis of masculinity in the early...
The counted and the uncounted: The occupational structure of early American cities.
Game location as a determinant of team performance in ACC basketball during 1900-1991.
A comparison study of faculty members' perceived knowledge and satisfaction regarding NCAA...
Manipulating adults' achievement goals in a sport task: Effects on cognitive, affective and...
The development of a data base management system for a National Hockey League (NHL) team.
The relationships among competitiveness, age and ability in distance runners.
Determining decision-making effectiveness using NCAA basketball tournament results.
Incentives for exercise in younger and older women.
Depictions of female athletes on Sports Illustrated covers, 1957-1989.
The effect of expertise on peak performance: The case of home-field advantage.
Anxiety reduction in competitive running as a function of success.
The presentation of human biological diversity in sport and exercise science textbooks: The...
Skiers' perceptions of danger as a function of awareness of fatalities.
Race, centrality, and educational attainment: An NFL perspective.
Distance runners' causal attributions for most successful and least successful races.
Integrating sport psychology and sports counseling: Developmental programming, education, and...
Effect of internal and external imagery on cricket performance.
Managerial change and organizational effectiveness in Major League Baseball: Findings for the...
Assaults on umpires: A statewide survey.
Mood and psychological skills of world-ranked female tennis players.
The influence of race/ethnicity in salary arbitration.
Injured athletes: A study of emotional responses.
The effects of exercise withdrawal on mood states in runners.
Africa Today in the early years: The debate over strategy for the liberation of South Africa.
The ideologies and strategies of resistance in post-Sharpville South Africa: Thoughts on Anthony...
African indigenous churches as a source of socio-political transformation in South Africa.
The A.B.C's of cloth and politics in Cote d'Ivoire.
Negotiating power: A study of the Ben Ka Di women's association in Bamako, Mali.
Political history and social commentary in Malian Sogobo theater.
The priest/artist tradition in Achebe's Arrow of God.
African arts in the academe: Some thoughts on the politics of exhibition.
When mirror turns lamp: Frantz Fanon as cultural visionary.
Regional elections in Namibia: Deepening democracy and gender inclusion.
Elections, leadership and democracy in Congo.
African-Americans and U.S. policy toward post-apartheid South Africa.
Kenya: State and civil society the first year after the election.
Mamas fighting for freedom in Kenya.
Human rights and state despotism in Kenya: Institutional problems.
The pauperization of the Maasai in Kenya.
Race, class and color: The African American discourse on identity.
And the results showed promise... Physicians, childbirth, and Southern Black migrant women...
Seeds of destruction: Homicide, race, and justice in Omaha, 1880-1920.
From Sponge Cake to Hamentashen: Jewish identity in a Jewish settlement house, 1885-1952.
Division and reunion: Woodrow Wilson, immigration, and the myth of American unity.
The cultural changes of Polish-American parochial schools in Milwaukee, 1866-1988.
The comparative method and poststructural structuralism--new perspective for migration studies.
Diverging political affiliations and ethnic perspectives: Philadelphia Germans and Antebellum...
The ethnic historical society in changing times.
Comment: Constructing identities, bridging dialogues, and the potential relevance ...
Northwest Coast art: The culture of the land claims.
Locke Setman, Emil Nolde and the search for expression in N. Scott Momaday's The Ancient World.
Black Hawk's An Autobiography: Production and use of an `Indian' voice.
The outsider in James Welch's The Indian Lawyer.
Red Atlantis revisited: Community and culture in the writings of John Culler.
Claiming legitimacy: Prophecy narratives from northern aboriginal women.
Conflicting perspectives on the role of the village public safety officer in native villages in...
Kiowa powwows: Continuity in ritual practice.
The U.S. Supreme Court's explication of `federal plenary power': An analysis of case law...
Tonita Pena (Quah Ah), pueblo painter: Asserting identity through continuity and change.
Reflections on the history of U.S.-Japanese relations.
Asian Americans under the influence of `Japan bashing'.
American studies in Japan: an economist's point of view.
American history for South Africa: Perceptions and objectives.
Research agenda for the history of tourism: Towards an international social history.
Questions of cultural exchange: The NIAS statement on the European reception of American mass...
American studies and the `War' with Britain within French universities.
Personalization as Americanization?: The rise and fall of leader-dominated governmental...
Seeds of change: The role of the teaching of English (TESOL) and American Studies.
The 1994 American Studies Conference in Tbingen, Germany.
Between the lines: A textual analysis of the Gaza-Jericho agreement.
Jerusalem in history: Notes on the origins of the city and its tradition of tolerance.
The wounded republic: Lebanon's struggle for recovery.
The silent demise of democracy: The role of the Clinton administration in the 1994 Yemeni civil war.
The new oil order: Built on sand?
The struggle of Palestinian women in the occupied territories: Between national and social...
Palestinian human rights activism under Israeli occupation: The case of al-Haq.
Religious inquisition as social policy: The persecution of the Zanadiqa in the...
The 1993 elections in Jordan.
Taming Wasta to achieve development.
The international context of liberalization and democratization in the Arab world.
Blueprint for a democratic Palestinian state: UNLU communiques and the codification of political...
Where Are the Great Powers?
How to Defeat Serbia.
Democracy and its Discontents.
Germany's Choice.
Peering into the Future.
The Drug Money Maze.
AMBITIOUS IRAN, TROUBLED NEIGHBORS.
ARABS AND ISRAELIS: SLOW WALK TOWARD PEACE.
THE GLOBAL ECONOMY BUNGLED.
DANGERS OF SLOW GROWTH.
A NEW TRADE ORDER.
NEW MISSION FOR FOREIGN AID.
The evolution of the Taba Curriculum Development Project.
Social Studies Learning Activities Packets.
Using maps to teach note taking and outlining for report writing.
Social studies by electronic mail.
Bring the courtroom to the classroom: Develop civic awareness with simulation activities.
How not to get a driver's license or a lesson in time zones for middle-school students.
The new social studies: The memoir of a practitioner.
A new social studies: The Kentucky Education Reform Act of 1990.
Applying generalizations in middle school geography classes.
Images of American business: Integrating art and economics.
Gone but not forgotten--reflections on the new social studies movement.
`I think there was a storm in the desert'.
Taking advantage of out-of-school opportunities for meaningful social studies learning.
Messages that high school world history textbooks convey.
Public choice theory: A new perspective for social education research.
In the beginning--Albert McKinley and the founding of The Social Studies.
One use of sources in the teaching of history.
Teaching about South Korea in the global economy.
Economics for grades K-9.
Fiction as a springboard to U.S. history research projects.
A novel approach to geographic education: Using literature in the social studies.
Epistemological implications of training social studies teachers.
African art and African-American identity.
A collection of African art in seventeenth-century Germany.
Drag in the universe.
A tribute to William Fagg.
William Fagg remembered.
Additional notes on the Afro-Portuguese ivories.
Sculptors of Opin.
Composition and style.
Understanding Yoruba art and aesthetics.
Thoughts on Nok.
Museums, wars, and healing.
More than wives and mothers: The artistry of Mande potters.
Mambila figurines and masquerades: Problems of interpretation.
Ekpo society masks of the Ibibio.
Convulsions of the canon.
Music.
The subject in the scene of representation.
`In this cold barn we dream'.
We lost it at the movies.
On telling tales.
Flexible time.
Subject/subjectivity and agency in the art of African Americans.
On the histories of artifacts.
Art historical topologies.
New encounters with Les Demoiselles d'Avignon: Gender, race, and the origins of Cubism.
Why Monet gave up figure painting.
The image of Ganymede in France, 1730-1820: The survival of homoerotic myth.
Piety and patronage in seicento Rome: Two noblewomen and their convents.
Art, power, and arts education.
Psychology, control, and policy formation: Empowerment and control--Can power be given? Can...
Arts education policy in the school culture.
The litigation engine: Influence and control of K-12 arts education policy.
Creative diversity, artistic valuing, and the peaceable imagination.
Collaborations and the conundrums they breed: Introduction to the symposium on community resources.
Rethinking the question of quality in art.
National standards: The whys and what fors.
National standards for art education: The emperor's new clothes.
Arts education and the transition to work.
Blurring the line between teaching and research: Some future challenges for arts education...
The right moves: Challenges of dance assessment.
Video in the classroom: A tool for reform.
The gains and losses of time.
Time, technology, and creative process.
On the origin of Spanish eres.
Libro de Alexandre: Fantastic didacticism.
Conquering marvels: The marvelous other in the texts of Christopher Columbus.
Spindles for swords: The re/dis-covery of Maria de Zayas' presence.
Luces de Bohemia: Inversion of Sophocles' Oedipus at Colonus.
Fashioning the ancien regime: Alarcon's Sombrero de Tres Picos.
The Holy Trinity in La Lozana Andaluza.
The representation of the body in the poetry of Alejandra Pizarnik.
(Re)covering the Chiasmus: Restoring the Libro(s) de Alexandre.
Economy and utopia in the medieval hispanic chivalric romance.
Reading Sarmiento: Once more, with passion.
Pentimento: The parodic text of `La Gitanilla'.
Sports and recreational activities in Guatemala and Mexico, late 1800s to 1926.
Baseball wars: The Mexican Baseball League and nationalism in 1946.
Hispanic roots of American rodeo.
Charreada: Performance and interpretation of an equestrian folk tradition in Mexico and the...
`Image is everything': Latin baseball players and the United States press.
Political football: Sports, power and machismo in Luisa Valenzuela's The Lizard's Tail.
Three Kings Day in Consuelo: Cricket, baseball, and the Cocolos in San Pedro de Macoris.
The history of Peruvian women's volleyball.
The failure of Caribbean integration: Lessons from grass roots basketball.
Sport in Cuba: Castro's last stand.
Setting up an honors program.
Improvisation through guided self-study.
An integrated approach.
Dalcroze skills for all teachers.
Choosing pluralism or particularism.
MIDI technology for the scared to death.
Alice Parker.
MENC today.
Selecting an electronic keyboard, Part II.
MENC today.
A band program from down under.
Displacing professionals the legal issues.
Learn the language of music through journals.
A/V alternatives for interesting homework.
Working together for music education.
Technology for teaching.
Music education in our multimusical culture.
A Dalcroze perspective on skills for learning.
Woodwind vibrato in the band class.
The legacy of Maddy and Giddings.
Using karaoke in the classroom.
MENC today.
National standards what's next?
A dysfunctional culture.
Music in the air and on the walls.
Awakening students to the art of conducting.
Multiculturalism, music, and information highways.
MENC today.
Programming rehearsals for student success.
Making the elementary music program essential.
Music students and academic growth.
Developing readiness for music reading.
Acoustics, performance, and your concert hall.
Teaching abroad.
I etcetera: On the poetics and ideology of multipersoned narratives.
Narrative apostrophe: Reading, rhetoric, resistance in Michel Butor's La modification and Julio...
Self-Help for narratee and narrative audience: How `I'--and `you'--read `how'.
Self-consuming second-person fiction: Jose Emilio Pacheco's `Tarde de agosto' (`August Afternoon').
Textual you and double deixis in Edna O'Brien's A Pagan Place.
From cultural provocation to narrative cooperation: Innovative uses of the second person in...
The speaking object: Daphne Marlatt's pronouns and lesbian poetics.
Second-person narrative as a test case for narratology: The limits of realism.
Fanny's fantasies: Class, gender, and the unreliable narrator in Cleland's Memoirs of a Woman...
Direct addresses, narrative authority, and gender in Rebecca Harding Davis's `Life in the Iron...'.
DELEITAR ENSEÑANDO: HUMOR AND THE DIDACTIC IN GALDóS'S MISERICORDIA.
TERRORIZING THE "FEMININE" IN HUGO, DICKENS, AND FRANCE.
THE PROLOGUES TO THE SPANISH TEXTS PRINTED IN ITALY IN THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.
METATHEATRICAL GAMES AS POLITICAL METAPHOR: A TRIPTYCH BY EDUARDO MANET.
WRITING AND VAGABONDAGE: RENÉE NÉRÉ AND EMMA BOVARY.
ATEMPORAL LABYRINTHS IN TIME: J.L. BORGES AND THE NEW PHYSICISTS.
THE AESTHETICS OF THE VISUAL AND THE VERBAL: SUCCESSFUL INTERFERENCE IN PIERRE REVERDY AND JUAN GRIS'S AU SOLEIL DU PLAFOND.
HONORIO BUSTOS DOMECQ, SIX PROBLEMS AND ALL THAT SKAZ.
SCRIBBLING THE CANON: VICENTE LEÑERO'S EL GARABATO.
CLASSICAL CONTINUITY AND TRANSPOSITION IN TWO TWELFTH-CENTURY ADAPTATIONS OF THE AENEID.
LOVELESS LETTERS: NARRATIVE DECEITS IN GUILLERAGUES'S LETTRES PORTUGAISES.
Demanding more justice.
Struggling toward recovery.
Chasing the ideal.
Greed, ignorance and overbilling.
At the creation.
Un-courtly manners.
When worlds collide.
Identity crisis.
Taming the emergency monster.
Defenders of the faith.
The judge who shaped civil rights.
Good ways to lose.
Justice defined. (cover story)
Terms for assessment.
Dealing with death.
Fears of the heart.
Small-town justice.
Questionable conduct.
Off-target opinions.
Judgment time for term limits.
ABA in action.
Funding the future.
Quiet times.
Risks of speaking out.
The national verdict.
Preliminary judgments.
The lineup.
Technotrials.
Chilling out.
Seeds of opportunity.
The crowded center.
Testing free speech.
The man to see.
Added protection.
The heat is on.
Keeping up on the go.
Deadly mistakes.
Conference opening.
Perspectives on sovereignty in the current context: An American viewpoint.
Perspectives on sovereignty in the current context: A Canadian viewpoint.
Discussion after the speeches of Richard B. Bilder and Donat Pharand.
Two paradigms for the rule of international trade law.
Sovereignty and international trade regulation.
Discussion after the speeches of Jonathan Fried and Gary Horlick.
Sovereignty and human rights.
When sovereignties may collide: In the antitrust arena.
Where there is a will, there is a way: Cooperation in Canada-U.S. antitrust relations.
Discussion after the speeches of Joseph P. Griffin and Lawton A.W. Hunter.
Sovereignty and the regulation of international business in the export control area.
The collision of Canadian and U.S. sovereignty in the area of export controls.
The limitations of sovereignty from Nuremberg to Sarajevo.
Discussion after the speech of Henry T. King, Jr.
When sovereignties may collide--sovereignty and the regulation of international business in the...
When sovereignties may collide--sovereignties and the regulation of business in relation to...
Environmental justice and the use of history.
A brief argument for the inclusion of an assessment of increased market share in...
Cleaning up the mess, or messing up the cleanup: Does CERCLA's jurisdictional bar...
Taking wetlands to the bank: The role of wetland mitigation banking in a comprehensive...
Deconstructing the Clean Air Act: Examining the controversy surrounding Massachusetts's...
Common law remedies and the UST regulations.
Trade, protectionism and the future of welfare capitalism.
NAFTA and democratization in Mexico.
The role of U.S. intelligence in promoting economic interests.
Internationalization: Implications for workers.
Regionalism and layered governance: The choice of trade institutions.
Alliances, preferential trading arrangements and sanctions.
Mideast economies after the Israel-PLO handshake.
Trade, integration and transformation in Eastern Europe.
India: A new tiger on the block?
Has the Lome convention failed ACP trade?
Trade-related investment measures: U.S. efforts to shape a pro-business world legal system.
Political correctness and political science.
Machiavelli's sermon on penance.
Abandoning the liberal quest?
Endings, transitions, or beginnings?
Creative thinking and emotion in human social life.
Realism and the problem of peaceful change.
Realism in retreat?
In the eye of the beholder.
Charting a course between realpolitik and ideology.
Recent perspectives on modern democracy.
The Supreme Court and racial reckoning.
Burkean virtue and the conservative good life.
Friendship as a political challenge.
Who is Nietzsche's Zarathustra, part 2.
Descartes on Machiavelli.
Political science in Mexico.
Hugo Friedrich's Montaigne.
Understanding the Japanese way: A new look at the dango shakai.
The impact of Western political thought in Chinese political discourse, on transitions from...
The Olympic movement and the end of the Cold War.
Spain lacks a politics of purpose.
Best-selling myth: Failing U.S. competitiveness.
Islam and democratic politics in Central Asia.
The development of nonproliferation export control in Russia.
Zambia at the crossroads.
Problems of state-building in the Central Asian republics.
The compatibility of public ownership and the market economy: A great debate in China.
European political parties and the European Union: Some disintegrating trends of integration.
Cuba and the United States: Back to the beginning.
A right of intervention based upon impaired sovereignty.
Simultaneous secure endoscopic sinus surgery and rhinoplasty.
Competence and behavioral problems in 6- to 12-year-old children in Flanders (Belgium) and...
Social networks in mainstream classrooms: Social affiliations and behavioral characteristics of...
Seriously emotionally disturbed students' knowledge and attitudes about AIDS.
Peer relationship problems and disruptive behavior disorders.
Identifying and assessing community-based social behavior of adolescents and young adults with EBD.
Multisystemic family preservation therapy: Preliminary findings from a study of rural and...
Improving adjustment outcomes for foster children with emotional and behavioral...
Effectiveness of intensive case management for homeless adolescents: Results of a 3-month follow-up.
Development and evaluation of treatment foster care and family-centered intensive case management...
Connecting low-income families to mental health services: The role of the family associate.
The Vanderbilt School-based counseling program: An interagency, primary-care model of mental...
The challenges of child mental health services research.
A preliminary assessment of asbestos awareness and control measures in...
The crash of USAir Flight 1016: Emergency preparedness.
Sanitation doesn't cost, it pays: Is it true and can we prove it?
Practical steps toward due diligence.
Products and services.
1992-93 sabbatical exchange visit to the United Kingdom--Part I.
The incidence of environment related illnesses in North Bengkulu, Indonesia.
Medical waste characterization.
New legislation on pesticides laws and food safety introduced.
Drinking water quality concerns and water vending machines.
Risk communication: Health risks associated with environmentally contaminated private wells...
Relationship between fish consumption and serum chlordane levels.
EPA's lead leaching from submersible well pumps.
The IHS diagnostic x-ray equipment radiation protection program.
Monitoring the effects of urban runoff on recreational waters.
Health impacts of garage workers: A preliminary study.
California's American Trader oil spill: Effective interagency and public-private collaboration in...
Quality systems and environmental management.
Suggested guidelines for remediation of damage from sewage backflow into buildings.
Iowa greenhouse applicators' perceptions and use of personal protective equipment.
Creating incentives for waste reduction: State and local perspective.
A gastroenteritis illness outbreak associated with swimming in a campground lake.
Current hazardous waste management and disposal practices among small quantity generators.
1992-93 sabbatical exchange visit to the United Kingdom-Part II.
Taking the trail to advancement.
Alternative dispute resolution in health services: Now more than ever.
After the dust settles.
Quality improvement: Boon or boondoggle?
The algebra of managed care.
Healthcare reform perspectives of rural and urban hospital leaders: Issues and attitudes.
Home care: An emerging solution to the healthcare crisis.
Career wellness plans: Change and the healthcare worker.
Clinton health reform: Here come the health police.
The end of the not-for-profit hospital?
Secondary prevention in non-rheumatic atrial fibrillation after transient ischaemic attack or...
Risk of extrahepatic bileduct cancer after cholecystectomy.
Angioscopy in variant angina: Coronary artery spasm and intimal injury.
Supplementation with vitamin A and iron for nutritional anaemia in pregnant women in West Java...
Beneficial effect of autologous blood transfusion on infectious complications after colorectal...
Molecular virology and pathogenesis of hepatitis B.
Clinical aspects of hepatitis B virus infection.
Food supply and risk of hunger.
Endemic Kaposi's sarcoma in Africa and local volcanic soils.
London perspective.
Biomechanical assessment of below-knee residual limb tissue.
Joint angle parameters in gait: Reference data for normal subjects, 10-79 years of age.
Pressure redistribution by molded inserts in diabetic footwear.
Cardiorespiratory status and movement capabilities in adults with limb amputation.
Evolution of mechanical fingerspelling hands for people who are deaf-blind.
Three-dimensional computer model of the human buttocks, in vivo.
Anaerobic power output and propulsion technique in spinal cord injured subjects during...
Modelling the propulsion characteristics of a standard wheelchair.
Drag and sprint performance of wheelchair basketball players.
Evaluation of methods for determining rearward static stability of manual wheelchairs.
`Shameless acts' in Colorado: Abuse of scholarship in constitutional cases.
Feminist theory's wrong turn.
`Imagined tyranny'? Political correctness reconsidered.
Political correctness in Britain: A blueprint for decline.
Challenges to science and authority in contemporary medical education.
Toni Morrison as literary critic.
Liberal education and politics: Lessons from the American founding.
Opinion and the world of possibilities.
The humanities, in memoriam.
Want a more inclusive curriculum? Try reading `The Canon'.
Latin fanatic.
Pariah science.
A loss for words.
Billy Blake's trial.
American dryad: Agnes de Mille.
The wasp leaves the bottle.
Meanwhile, back on the ward....
How not to make a Stradivarius.
Wright Morris: Three photographs.
The rumor of Hamlet.
Four excursions.
The night: On Michelangelo Antonioni.
Order and disorder on Smith Island.
Self-portraits.
Dante's Canto XXV: Among the Thieves.
The language of Balloon.
Soccer: The game America refuses to play.
Literary criticism, localism, and local knowledge.
In defense of the realm: Sassoon's memoirs.
The Catholic Church in revolutionary Guatemala, 1944-54: A house divided.
The use of religious convictions by legislators and judges.
What God can help? Trinity and pop religions of crisis.
Horizons that differ: Women and men and the flight from understanding.
Letter from Bangladesh.
The embrace of East and West.
Christ's body as male and female.
Trees, forestry, and the responsiveness of creation.
The greening of Buddhist practice.
Islam and ecology.
Desert attentiveness, desert indifference: Countercultural spirituality in the desert fathers and...
The Gaia Hypothesis: Implications for a Christian political theology of the environment.
Ethics and trauma: Levinas, feminism, and deep ecology.
Earth vigil: Darwin, death, and hope.
Religion in the White House.
Eve, malignant or maligned.
What's new(s) about the Dead Sea Scrolls?
Endangered reading: The African-American scholar between text and people.
The Jewish understanding of scripture.
The silent schism.
Factor analytic structure of the Scale to Assess World View.
Non-equivalence of WPPSI, WPPSI-R, and WISC-R scores.
The effect of manipulating CS hedonic value on the magnitude of a conditioned taste aversion.
Accuracy of memories from childhood and adolescence related to growth and size.
Validating a `spurning scale' for teachers.
Dysfunctional beliefs, self-monitoring, and marital conflict.
Depression, self-esteem, and complex attributions for life problems.
Evidence bearing on the affiliative tendency (MAFF) and sensitivity to rejection (MSR) scales.
Gender differences on the WPPSI, the WISC-R, and the WPPSI-R.
Children's understanding of television programmes: Three exploratory studies.
Equity, equality, and need: Three principles of justice or one? An analysis of `equity as desert'.
Multimethodological approach to examining risk-taking.
Situational influences on destructive acts.
Perfectionism and components of state and trait anxiety.
Individual differences in achieving tendency: Review of evidence bearing on a questionnaire measure.
Ethnicity, socioeconomic background and psychosis-proneness in a diverse sample of college students.
Luther's call and nitrogen narcosis.
The internal contradiction and the unconscious sources of activity.
Notes on emotional components of musical creativity and performance.
Pet attachment and generativity among young adults.
A comparison of cognitive and behavioral inductions of negative mood.
Are age and ethics related?
Interpersonal dependency correlates and locus of control orientation among obese adults in...
Understanding student judgments of teaching effectiveness: A `policy capturing' approach.
Work values and job satisfaction.
Relationships between aspects of work-related psychological well-being.
Rules for breaking formal rules: Social representations and everyday rule-governed behavior.
A factor analytic study of epistemological style of inventories.
Rethinking traditional weight management programs: A 3-year follow-up evaluation of a new approach.
Locus of control of Israeli women during the transition to marriage.
The relationship of satisfaction with life to personality characteristics.
The effects of stereotyping on impression formation: Cross-cultural perspectives on viewing...
Perceived control, illness status, stress, and adjustment to cardiac illness.
Extrinsic occupational needs and the relationship between need for achievement and locus of control.
Does occupational stereotyping still exist?
Spiritual inquiry.
Spiritual inquiry in Buddhism.
Asking to awaken.
Sensitive inquiry: A sane mind in a savvy body.
Psychotherapy as spiritual inquiry.
Healing images and symbols in nonordinary states of consciousness.
The internal mystery plays: The role and physiology of the visual system in contemplative practices.
Madness or transcendence? Looking to the ancient East for a modern transpersonal diagnostic system.
Individualism: A personality disorder.
The spirits say they aren't crazy: Trance and healing in cultural context.
Rites of passage and the borderline syndrome: Perspectives in transpersonal anthropology.
Ticked off!
Cattle take a dip at the U.S. border.
Corn's comeback cousin.
Leafy spurge is reunited with old enemy.
Diagnosing the tough ones.
Friendly flier.
Hit 'em with all we've got.
Native Americans fight weeds to keep their land.
Fungus and nematode pesta.
A dual citrus threat.
Can better barley be bred? (cover story)
The busiest of bees.
Harmonizing rangeland interests.
Fighting the fire ant. (cover story)
Jumping genes make genetic leaps.
Assault on the senses. (cover story)
Twin-screw extruder transforms starch.
Wind power where you want it.
Stemming wind erosion.
Evicting the boll weevil. (cover story)
Better traps mean fewer flies.
What was around comes around.
Rooftop greenhouse provides nutrition answers.
Insect I.D.'s now at your fingertips.
Science at home on the range.
Genome mapping points the way.
Probing the soils of the frozen North.
Roots.
Natural microbes curb salmonella.
More luscious fruits.
Small fruits make it big.
Rice.
That gray melon from Charleston.
Science in your salad.
New flower power!
Erosion study crosses the border.
Key Influences on NATO States' National Security Negotiating Behavior.
Sexual Harassment in the U.S. Military: Individualized and Environmental Contexts.
Managing a Moral Dilemma: Israeli Soldiers in the Intifada.
The Military and Human Rights in a Post-Cold War Africa.
Public Opinion and Foreign Threats: Eisenhower's Response to Sputnik.
The Socioeconomic Benefits to Military Families of Home-Basing of Armed Forces.
The Army's War against Malaria: Collaboration in Drug Research during World War II.
National Security and Democracy: The United Kingdom Experience.
Militarism, the United States and the Cold War.
Military Culture: Change and Continuity.
A Political-Warrior Model: The Combined Action Program.
Operation "Just Missed": Lessons From Failed Coup Attempts.
Military Retirees: A Portrait of the Community.
New Perspectives on the Military Profession: The I/O Model and Esprit de Corps Reevaluated.
Demographic Trends and Personnel Policies as Determinants of the Racial Composition of the Volunteer Army.
Keeping creationism out of the classroom.
Ecosystem function of biodiversity.
The delicate constitution of sharks.
Exotic species and the integrity of the Great Lakes.
Sustainability and technological development in agriculture.
Biological integrity versus biological diversity as policy directives.
Creating effective investigative laboratories for undergraduates.
Restoring the Everglades.
A pressure-filled life.
Attack of the fire ant.
Estrogens and song: Products of the songbird brain.
Writing as a tool for learning biology.
Ode to planet earth.
Newspaper coverage of biological subissues...
Early adoloscents' perceptions of relative risk...
Observed fears and discomforts among urban students...
Environmental issues: Cornell student's willingness...
The mechanics of nature appreciation.
Environmental education as a model for constructive teaching.
The children's attitudes toward the environment scale.
Developing effective brochures for increasing knowledge of environmental problems: The case ...
Environmental education at summer nature camp.
Reconceptualizing environmental education: Five possibilities.
Environmental education in Wisconsin: A techer survey.
Evaluating conservation education programs at a...
The environmental action index.
Ecological misconceptions.
Water literacy in college freshman ...
Community-supported agriculture: Opportunities for...
Environmental preference and risk recreation: The case of...
Education for responsibility within the framework of UNESCO.
Toward constructivist research in environmental education.
Institutions.
From Rio to Berlin...managing climate change. (cover story)
Empowering women.
Overview.
Renewable energy technology, an urgent need, a hard sell.
A bright future: Energy efficiency programs at electric utilities.
Improving energy efficiency.
The politics of agricultural resource abuse.
Population growth and a sustainable environment.
The Women's Environment and Development Organization.
Third world NGOs.
Whaling. (cover story)
Caring for the Earth.
Memory versus randomization in on-line algorithms.
POWER2: Next generation of the RISC System/6000 family.
POWER2 fixed-point, data cache, and storage control units.
POWER2 floating-point unit: Architecture and implementation.
POWER2 instruction cache unit.
The POWER2 performance monitor.
Commercial workload performance in the IBM POWER2 RISC System/6000 processor.
Exploiting functional parallelism of POWER2 to design high-performance numerical algorithms.
Instruction scheduling in the TOBEY compiler.
The Effects of Judgment Strategy and Prompting on Using Rule-Based Expert Systems for Knowledge Transfer.
Modeling Conversion Process Events.
Discussion of Modeling Conversion Process Events.
The origins of New Zealand's chinook salmon, Oncorhynchus tshawytscha.
Survey assessment of semi-pelagic gadoids: The example of walleye pollock, Theragra chalcogramma...
Fisheries management: The Kuwaiti experience.
Trade and management: Exclusive economic zones and the changing Japanese surimi market.
Sea turtle observations at explosive removals of energy structures.
Occurrence and behavior of juvenile red snapper, Lutjanus campechanus, on commercial shrimp...
A single-armed manta-board as a new diver-controlled planing board and its use of for underwater...
Trawling operations and South African (Cape) fur seals, Arctocephalus pusillus pusillus.
King mackerel, Scomberomorus cavalla, mark-recapture studies off Florida's East Coast.
Observations of the 1992 U.S. pelagic pair trawl fishery in the Northwest Atlantic.
The origin, evolution, and demise of the U.S. sea turtle fisheries.
Seasonal occurrence of the white shark, Carcharodon carcharias, in waters off the Florida West...
New products.
Gamma-ray CT probes power plant piping. (cover story)
Building more efficient turbines.
Micromachines tap actuating principles.
Energy retrofits can cut use and costs.
Wind systems for electrical power production.
Solar thermal power today and tomorrow.
Commercializing photovoltaic technology.
New products.
Engineering for the ends of the earth.
Fuel cells turn up the heat.
Optimization for finite element applications.
Fridge of the future.
New products.
Is CVT the car transmission of the future? (cover story)
Verifying analytical models.
Navigating with gyroscopes and GPS.
Boosting the performance of flat-armature motors.
New products.
Engineering on a grand scale.
Surface modeling for multiaxis machining.
Nondestructive evaluation with laser ultrasound.
Metalworkers clean up their waste.
Software exchange.
New products.
A new generation of power plant sensors.
Taking control of the desktop.
Hot-gas cleanup for coal-based gas turbines.
Getting the most out of geothermal power.
Developing new miniature energy systems.
Future flight.
`We nailed it!'. (cover story)
AAS meeting.
Creating gender-friendly astronomy classrooms.
High atop the Baja.
Comet tales.
The big hit.
The solar system's new ring.
A radical in tweeds: Robert H. Dicke and--the general theory of relativity.
Education at the CFA.
Smash it up!
Robotic telescopes: Faithfully carrying on while we sleep.
Exploring the unseen universe.
Attacking the atmosphere.
AAS meeting.
The universe in the student's mind.
Soil of mars. (cover story)
The uncelebrated and unlucky Ursids.
Barley's ghost.
Shorebird squeeze. (cover story)
Four antelopes of the apocalypse.
What are men good for?
Sex and the single brine shrimp.
Secondhand silk.
The pulse that produced us.
Ancient Asia's cutting edge.
The dawn of adornment.
AUTHORS.
Fort Gadsden Dome, Florida.
Nobelists Brockhouse and Shull gave neutron scattering a jump start.
Distance to Virgo kicks off HST assault on the Hubble constant.
Florida dedicates National High Magnetic Field Laboratory.
Adaptive optics in astronomy.
The summer of 1953: A watershed for astrophysics.
Physics: A personal perspective.
Some thoughts on the SSC and the management of science.
Three-dimensional optical molasses binds a new type of crystal.
Optical probes in the quantum Hall regime.
Wannier-Stark ladders and Bloch oscillations in superlattices.
Nonlinear optics in quantum-confined structures.
The spectroscopy of quantum dot arrays.
Optical processes in microcavities.
IBM cuts research in physical sciences at Yorktown Heights and Almaden.
Clinton's budget boosts technology, making research scientists jittery.
The advanced neuron source knocks at the door of Congress.
HERA is now running with longitudinally polarized positions.
Human impacts on the nitrogen cycle.
Clouds and their effects on the climate system.
The ocean's overturning circulation.
Fuel cells: Energy conversion for the next century.
Industrial ecology: Minimizing the impact of industrial waste.
Clinton philosophy transforms NIST into `partner for industry'.
PSA international photography program listing.
Successful travel videography.
Telephoto lenses.
Papua New Guinea.
All aglow for our big six-o.
Photography is best in the northwest. (cover story)
Botswana...last true African wilderness.
Yosemite in winter.
How to photograph a space launch.
The great magazine shoot-out.
A week-long workshop--is it for your?
Special purpose lenses.
Are you short slides for your program.
Adventures of a part-time professional.
See spectacular Colorado Springs on the PSA conference tours.
Contemporary photography.
How would you improve this picture?
Sound actuated photos.
Who's who 1993.
Mimicking Monet.
Waiting for the light.
Photographic paradigms.
1994 awards and honors recipients.
The elegance of glass.
Leonardo, Mortensen and me.
Antarctica.
Photograph bears the easy way.
White weather photographer.
Digital photography.
News notes.
Sci-fi science.
News notes.
String.
How do you manage?
News notes.
News notes.
What do I do with all these activities?
Tentative standards for junior high schools.
Educating the twentieth-century youth.
The teacher in the high school of the future.
Correct English for modern needs.
Academic idols and ideals: A sharp analysis of three secondary-school movements.
Can a liberal teach in our schools?
Healdsburg High School's course on the automobile.
Sex education: A success in our social-studies class.
Authoritarianism: Enslaving yoke of nations and schools.
The postwar secondary school: A blueprint for planners.
6 steps to pupil participation in democratic school control.
Problem vs. subject: Pupils learn more in problem-centered units, according to 16-unit...
Groping my way through the group method.
Crusade for culture.
Events & opinion: A report to our readers.
Panoramas and vistas: New directions in writing instruction.
Cultural studies and its impact on composition.
The Syncretistic Theory: Bridging composition and literature through immersions.
Writing as transformation: A new paradigm for content writing.
Writing to learn history on-line.
From the (writing) center to the edge: Moving writers along the Internet.
The natural connection: The WAC program and the high school writing center.
Services for students with learning disabilities at two- and four-year institutions: Are they...
Multiculturalism and the community college: A case study of an immigrant education program.
Academic performance predictors for community college student assessment.
Retraining dislocated workers in the community college: Identifying factors for persistence.
Orientation and counseling in a California community college: Surveying the perspectives of a...
Tech Prep implementation in the United States: The once and future role of community colleges.
Origins of the California system: How the junior college movement came to California.
The excitement of discovery and the perils of premature conclusions.
Selective admissions in community college nursing programs: Ethical considerations.
Perceptions about the academic and social integration of underprepared students in an urban...
Rescission and reduction: Lessons from the edge.
Measuring community college effectiveness: The Tennessee model.
The NCTM standards and community colleges: Opportunities and challenges.
Preferred education and experience of community college English faculty: Twenty years later.
Community college administrators and faculty scholarship: A pilot study.
ERIC review: Faculty evaluation in community colleges.
Regression and path analysis models of Hispanic community college students' intent to persist.
Encouraging ESL student persistence: The influence of policy on curricular design.
Community college transfer students who earn bachelor's degrees.
Rebuilding the community: The future for the community college.
Role expectations of learning resources program directors in comprehensive community colleges.
ERIC review: Collaboration as a vehicle for community college facilities development.
The use of expert teachers to improve education.
School principals' perceptions: The use of formal observation of classroom teaching to improve...
Constructivism as substitute for memorization in learning: Meaning is created by learner.
Teaching grammar to adults and second language learning research.
Learning styles and the African American student.
Strategies to promote inclusion in primary grades mathematics classrooms.
Assessing the harmony of one's feelings in relation to culture embraced by use of biofeedback...
School-to-work programs offered by technical schools provide a viable alternative to traditional...
Subject centered versus an activity centered curriculum.
Collaborate for school success: African-American students from low income/public housing...
Landing the job: A survey of new teachers.
Use of mediation and negotiation in the resolution of special education disputes.
Research foundations of moral and ethical education.
Educators earning their doctorates: Doctoral student perceptions regarding cohesiveness and...
Elementary school teachers' out of pocket expenditures.
Maximizing cooperative learning success.
Teacher-based forms of inquiry.
Strategies for increasing African-American parental participation in the special education process.
Self-concept and math among potential school dropouts.
Perception of the Malaysian secondary-school science-students toward physics.
Assisting the transition of handicapped and at-risk preschool students into elementary school.
How do teachers' and professors' self-concepts relate to their actions and the actions of others?
Research priorities in teacher education: Perspectives of deans of colleges of education.
A study of teachers' and students' multi-cultural attitudes before and after the use of an...
Student-centered methods for decreasing anxiety and increasing interest level in undergraduate...
Prediction of teachers' use of technology based on personality type.
School improvement, talent development, and creativity.
The development of talent through curriculum.
From giftedness to talent: A developmental model and its...
Talent identification and development in the arts: An...
A talent approach to district programming for gifted and...
A summary of research regarding early entrance to college.
Identifying at-risk gifted students in an early college...
The place of achievement in the life of the spirit and the...
The appalachia model mathematics program for gifted students.
Parents' reasoning about the social and emotional...
Original thinking as a predictor of creative performance...
Why are there so few eminent women?
Study of life themes in Charlotte Bronte and Virginia Woolf.
Patty Smith Hill, gifted early childhood educator of the progressive era.
Girls who became famous literalists of the imagination.
Of blue collars and ivory towers: Women from blue-collar backgrounds in higher education.
Educational profiles of nine gifted American Indian women and their own stories about wanting to...
POSSESSION AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN EASTERN AFRICA: INTRODUCTION.
PLAYBOY PRINCELY SPIRITS OF MADAGASCAR: POSSESSION AS YOUTHFUL COMMENTARY AND SOCIAL CRITIQUE.
SOCIOCULTURAL CHANGE AND SPIRIT POSSESSION ON THE SWAHILI COAST OF EAST AFRICA.
ZAR AS MODERNIZATION IN CONTEMPORARY SUDAN.
WHEN SEEING IS BELIEVING: THE CHANGING ROLE OF VISUALITY IN A PHILIPPINE DANCE.
FAR FROM MANILA: POLITICAL IDENTITIES ON A PHILIPPINE ISLAND.
INTRODUCTION: PRINT, WRITING, AND THE POLITICS OF RELIGIOUS IDENTITY IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
PRINT ISLAM: MEDIA AND RELIGIOUS REVOLUTION IN AFGHANISTAN.
ISLAMIC ANTHROPOLOGY AND THE "ANTHROPOLOGY OF ISLAM"
Increasing income inequality and wealth concentration in the prosperous societies of the West.
Presidential popularity in a context of economic crisis and political change: The...
Identity and fear: A survey study of the Arab East.
Oil, war, and semiperipheral mobility: The case of Iraq.
Investment penetration, agrarian change, and political conflict in developing countries.
Overcoming the past: De-Communization and reconstruction of post-Communist societies.
Bureaucracy and implementation of complex tasks in rapidly developing states: Evidence from...
Make-believe play among Huli children: Performance, myth, and imagination.
Tradition, power, and allegory: Constructions of the past in two Danish religious movements.
The cultural effects of conveyance loss in gravity-fed irrigation systems.
The nursing home: Are these the golden years?
Unloving Care revisited.
Design in nursing homes: Environment as a silent partner in caregiving.
The changing face of nursing home residents: Meeting their diverse needs.
The trend toward specialization in nursing care facilities.
The changing role of physicians in nursing homes.
Nursing facilities in the emerging integrated healthcare delivery systems.
Treatment of mental disorders among nursing home residents: Will the market provide?
The resident assessment instrument: Implications for quality, reimbursement and research.
The teaching nursing home: Past accomplishments and future directions.
A contemporary advocacy agenda for nursing home consumers.
The evolution of the nursing home as an intermediary institution.
Transforming care institutions for the frail elderly: Out of one shall be many.
Are nursing homes dinosaurs?
Continuing implementation of the Patient Self-Determination Act in nursing homes: Challenges...
Where have nursing homes been? Where are they going?
Indigenous development of Mesoamerican irrigation.
Home as a region.
Mexicali's Chinatown.
Postmodern Phoenix.
Jail Recidivism in a Forensic Case Management Program.
Job Satisfaction Among Social Work Discharge Planners.
Decision-Making Situations in Health Care.
Health Conditions and Perceived Quality of Life in Retirement.
Cancer Pain Management and the Role of Social Work: Barriers and Interventions.
Mental Health Problems and Alcohol Abuse: Co-Occurrence and Gender Differences.
Decision-Making Influence: An Empirical Study of Social Workers in Nursing Homes.
Older People's Responses to Education About Advance Directives.
Denial of Death and Taxes: America at Middle Age.
Themes and Variations Among Seven Comprehensive Perinatal Drug and Alcohol Abuse Treatment Models.
Beyond the Rhetoric: Shared Responsibility Versus the Contract with America.
An Aid to Empowerment: A Caregiver Well-being Scale.
CURANDERISMO: Demystifying the Health Beliefs and Practices of Elderly Mexican Americans.
MULTIPLE PERCEPTIONS OF DISCHARGE PLANNING IN ONE URBAN HOSPITAL.
PROVIDER AND CONSUMER PROFILES OF TRADITIONAL AND HIGH-TECH HOME HEALTH CARE: The Issue of Differential Access.
APPLYING THE CODEPENDENCY MODEL TO A GROUP FOR FAMILIES OF OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE PEOPLE.
INTERDISCIPLINARY EXPECTATIONS OF THE MEDICAL SOCIAL WORKER IN THE HOSPITAL SETTING: Part 2.
SOCIAL WORK PERSPECTIVES IN ORGAN PROCUREMENT.
DOES APOLOGIZING HELP? The Role of Self-Blame and Making Amends in Recovery From Bereavement.
Of Technological Targets and Budgetary Bombs: The Dangers of Depersonalized Budgetary Warfare.
A physical education christmas carol (with apologies to Charles Dickens).
What underlies the teaching of motor skills.
Assessment of cardiorespiratory fitness of college aged students in large physical education...
Home schooling: An assessment of parental attitudes toward exercise and child activity levels.
Physical education for pre-school children with disabilities: A job for the classroom teacher or...
Supervision of preservice teachers during an early field teaching experience.
Succeeding in the tenure and promotion process.
Eating disorders prevention: Taking the tiger by the tail.
A comparison of two instructional formats on heart rate intensity and skill development.
Liability of educators for the negligence of others (substitutes, aides, student teachers, and...
An examination of physical education teachers from a research-based preparation program.
The think aloud procedure: A research technique for gaining insight into the student perspective.
Comparative study of teacher and pupil process variables in preschool physical education.
Teaching preservice physical education teachers to reflect.
Effects of contingent music on laps run in a high school physical education class.
A gender comparison of competencies important for success in college athletic administration.
Participation in youth sports, gender, and the moral point of view.
Intervention strategies in multicultural education: A...
Appendix A.
Task systems in elementary physical education classes...
An analysis of physical education avoidance.
The effects of two types of required physical education...
Cardiorespiratory fitness and physical activity behavior of...
Visionary leadership and the physical educator.
Free-standing canes.
Springboard.
Counseling college students with visual impairments in preparation for employment.
Teaching first aid skills to people with visual impairments.
Celebrating white cane month.
Survey of salaries of professionals in the field of blindness.
Independent living skills for older Americans: Three-year analysis of service provision.
Springboard.
Social work in a low vision program.
Monocular blindness: Is it a handicap?
Uncivil war: Current American conservatives and social history.
The culture wars, 1965-1995: A historian's map.
`Employable mothers' and `suitable work': A re-evaluation of welfare and wage-earning for wome.
Culture and contrasts in a Northern European village: Lifestyles among Manorial peasants in 18th...
From children's point of view: Childhood in nineteenth-century Iceland.
Etiquette books and emotion management in the 20th century: Part two--the integration...
Il mio buono compare: Choosing godparents and the uses of baptismal kinship in renaissance Florence.
A cracked mirror. Images and self-images of elderly men and women in the Netherlands in the...
Social and geographical mobility in the old world and new world communities: Earls Colne, Ipswich...
Relationship of sport participation to sex role orientation and attitudes toward women among high...
The influence of committee functioning on the organizational commitment of volunteer...
Precompetitive preparations in professional hockey.
Comparing perceived sex role orientations of the ideal male and female athlete to the ideal male...
Facility familiarity and the home advantage.
Stress, burnout, and intention to terminate among umpires.
The effects of the coaches' use of humor on female volleyball players' evaluation of their coaches.
Decision style choices of high school basketball coaches: The effects of situational and coach...
The effects of goals on the maintenance of exercise programs.
Basketball free-throw performance: Practice implications.
The moderating effects of aerobic fitness and mental training on stress reactivity.
Psychological factors associated with overtraining: Implications for youth sport coaches.
Supporting audiences and performance under pressure: The home-ice disadvantage in hockey...
Breaking birds and building bonds: Democratization and interaction at an urban trap range.
Exploration of the relationship between exercise behavior and exercise identity.
Structural charting and perceptions of momentum in intercollegiate volleyball.
Playing position and psychological skill in American football.
Psychological factors associated with alcohol use by high school athletes.
Self-evaluation compared to coaches' evaluation of athletes' competitive orientation.
Utility of team indices for predicting end of season ranking in two national polls.
The decline of the .400 hitter: An explanation and a test.
On implementing Africa's peace accords: From defection to cooperation.
South Africa's new foreign and military policy: Opportunities and constraints.
Displaced academies and the quest for a new world academic order.
Reason, identity, and the African quest: The problems of self-definition in African philosophy.
Social theory and the challenges of Africa's future.
Africa in the global political economy at the end of the...
The African Economic Community: Problems and prospects.
Prerequisities for economic integration in Africa: An...
Liberal economic reform in Ghana: A contested political...
Remembering the immigrant experience in American culture.
M.B. Curtis and the making of the American stage Jew.
Where have the Scandinavian-Americanists been?
The other immigrants: Comparing the Irish in Australia and the United States.
National groups and the popular front: The case of the International Workers Order.
Gender, schooling and teaching, and the Nisei in Hawai'i: An episode in American immigration...
The Molly Maguires in popular culture.
Black and Jewish responses to Japanese internment.
Race, religion, and nationality in American society: A model of ethnicity--from contact to...
`This story I am telling you is true': Collaboration and...
On the road to Canandaigua: The treaty of 1794.
Relocations upon relocations: Home, language, and Native...
The roles and status of men and women in the nineteenth...
Intercultural identity in James Welch's Fools Crow and...
Ray Young Bear's Cantaloupe Terrorist: Storytelling as a...
Eighteenth-Century treaties: Amended Iroquois Condolence...
Paradoxes of Modernism and Indianness in the South East.
`Constructing' Nations within States: The quest for federal...
A note on Cherokee Theological concepts.
Native Americans and the environment: A survey of Twentieth...
Singing in the (post-Apocalyptic) rain: Some high/low notes on post/postmodernism and...
Order, disorder and the homeless in the United States and Japan.
A brief history of PC, with annotated bibliography.
Bellow's Henderson the Rain King as an allegory for the fifties.
Using the Internet for international research.
Is there such a thing as women's humor?
An historical outline of Mongol-American relations and American studies in Mongolia.
The 1995 American Studies Conference in Hamburg, Germany.
The category mistake of Messianic nationalism.
Islamic social welfare organizations in Cairo: Islamization from below.
Filling the vacant throne of Nasser: The economic discourse of Egypt's Islamist opposition.
Military security and political stability in the Gulf.
Al-la Nidam: An Arab view of the new world (dis)order.
Algeria, the Maghreb Union, and the Western Sahara stalemate.
State-society relations in Egypt: Restructuring the political.
The financial implications of economic sanctions against Iraq.
Nationalism and the Arabs.
Jinsiyya versus Muwatana: The question of citizenship and the state in the Middle East: The cases...
Between betrayal and betrayal: Fundamentalism, family law and feminist struggle in Algeria.
Chinese organized crime and illegal alien trafficking: Humans as a commodity.
Reaching out in the darkness: The changing nature of U.S. policy toward Taiwan.
Time to welcome Taiwan back into the United Nations.
The saffron surge in Indian politics: Hindu nationalism and the future of secularism.
Introduction.
An American Perspective I.
A Kashmiri Perspective I.
A Kashmiri Perspective II.
An Indian Perspective I.
An Indian Perspective II.
A Pakistani Perspective.
An International Human Rights Perspective.
Party primaries in Taiwan: Reappraisal.
Taiwan's 1994 gubernatorial and mayoral elections.
China's Korea policy: From `one Korea' to `two Koreas'.
Democratization in Thailand.
Rethinking ASEAN as a security community in Southeast Asia.
Teaching secondary social studies to low and moderate achievers: A modest proposal.
The new social studies in perspective: The Carnegie Mellon slow-learner project.
El acto: Studying the Hispanic American experience through the farm worker theater.
Global competition and education: Another Sputnik?
Civics: If not, why not?
Dreaming of America: Weaving literature into middle-school social studies.
From the Hobbesian floor to the Kantian ceiling.
The Internet: a curriculum warehouse for social studies teachers.
Narrative constructions: cultural frames for history.
Riding the rapids of current events!
Developing active citizens: Community service learning in social studies teacher education.
Evaluation of the implementation of curriculum materials for civics in the Netherlands.
The social studies conceptual dilemma: Six contemporary approaches.
Using a teacher's travel experience to enhance students' learning.
History and computers: The views from selected social studies journals.
A novel use of literature to integrate environmental education with social studies.
Storytelling: A bridge to Korea.
Fundamentals of market economics: Junior achievement International's newest venture.
Globally speaking, smaller can be better.
Dogon art at the Musee Dapper.
Bring beauty back to Mali.
Seydou Keita.
On art and museums in South Africa after the elections.
Northern exposure.
Invention and reinvention in the traditional arts.
African Art in the National Museum of Ireland.
Northern Kongo ancestor figures.
Transformation through the cloth: An Egungun costume of Yoruba.
New Orleans Museum of Art.
Rethinking recyclia.
Hidden Treasures of the Tervuren Museum. (cover story)
Mythologies of tribal art.
Kinshasa.
Objects and acts.
Vetoes and compatibilities.
Masterdisciplinarity and the `pictorial turn'.
Interdisciplinarity and visual culture.
Mapping interdisciplinarity.
Warrant for trespass/permission to peer.
Art history and images that are not art.
J.M.W. Turner's Ploughing Up Turnips, near Slough: The cultivation of cultural dissent.
Prints, salami, and cheese: Savoring the Roman festival of the Chinea.
Seeing the Shroud: Guarini's reliquary chapel in Turin and the ostension of a dynastic relic.
New identifications in Raphael's School of Athens.
The question of modernism and postmodernism.
The national arts education landscape: Past, present, and future.
Music, the humanities, and `a sense of where you are'.
Choices for urban art education.
Will voluntary national standards fix the potholes of arts education?
The arts as modes of learning and methods of teaching: A (borrowed and adapted) case for...
The limits and costs of integration in arts education.
Control of K-12 arts education: Who sets the curriculum?
The myth of the eccentric genius: Some thoughts about political correctness and art education.
The evolving symbiotic relationship of arts education and U.S. business.
Controlling the knowledge base in the arts: The keystone of power in arts education.
Civility.
Art education in post-communist Hungary: Ideologies, policies, and integration.
When a banner becomes a mere slogan: Integrating drama/theatre education into the curriculum in...
Integrating the arts into the general curriculum: An Australian perspective.
Collective, integrated arts: The expedient generic myth.
Two studies in old Spanish homonymics.
Mise en abyme and the abyss: Two paintings in Ernesto Sabato's trilogy of novels.
Tense and mood after no se si.
On recipes, reading and revolution: Postboom parody in Como agua para chocolate.
A Latin linguistic icon readapted in proto-romance and in medieval Spanish.
The comedia and its modes.
Language and identity in late Spanish Islam.
Soy un fue, y un sera, y un es cansado: Text and context.
Entrando Calisto una huerta...and other textual problems in the Celestina.
Complicitous laughter: Hilarity and seduction in Celestina.
The evolution of the Spanish causative construction.
What are little girls made of under socialism?: Cuba's Mujeres [women] and Muchacha [girl] in the...
Culture industries and cultural identity: Will NAFTA make a difference?
Resistance and appropriation in Brazil: How the media and `official culture' institutionalized...
Communication in ritual performance: Carnival in Antigua 1989 and 1990.
From the ground up: The flourishing of children's and young adult literature in Brazil.
`Waas sappening?': Narrative structure and iconography in Born in East L.A.
Sports language, cultural imperialism, and the anti-imperialist critique in Latin America.
Latin America and the Olympic Games: A `blank spot' in sports history.
The gaucho revival in Argentina in the 1930s and 1940s.
Maradona's left: Postmodernity and national identity in Argentina.
Gaspar Pumarejo: Pre-Castro Cuba's `number two' television tycoon.
Cuba's comic art tradition.
MENC today.
Music teachers helping troubled students.
Why not start a steel band?
Introducing the music of East Africa.
Instrumental warm-ups to improve skills.
Teaching MIDI from an African American angle.
Portfolio assessment for better evaluation.
Idea bank.
Straight talk.
Interactive television and distance learning.
Cooperative learning for better performance.
The student-teaching portfolio.
Helping students master improvisation.
Psychologism and the novel: The case of Selma Lagerlof's Gosta Berlings Saga.
Notes to Peer Gynt.
Icelandic confirmation ritual in cultural-historical perspective.
The scholar and the Web: Electronic resources for the Scandinavian scholar on the World Wide Web.
The honor of Gu...laugr Snorrason and Einarr ...ambarskelfir: A reply.
The red faced saint, again.
Einarr ...ambarskelfir, again.
Report of the president.
Report of the secretary-treasurer.
Foucault's response to Freud: Sado-masochism and the aestheticization of power.
Perverse pleasure and fetishized text: The deathly erotics of Carter's `The Bloody Chamber'.
Criminal pleasures, pleasurable crime.
The heroine is being beaten: Freud, sadomasochism, and reading the romance.
Introduction: From possible worlds to virtual reality.
Philosophical realism and postmodern antirealism.
Fictional worlds: Density, gaps, and inference.
The problem of impossible fictions.
A postmodern challenge to reference-world construction: Gilbert Sorrentino's Mulligan Stew.
The imagery of a myth: Computer-assisted research on literature.
Regarding singulative narration.
Reader-response under review: Art, game, or science?
Supplement to a bibliography of Russian formalism in English.
BAUDELAIRE'S "LE MAUVAIS VITRIER" AND "MADEMOISELLE BISTOURI"
STAGING THE EXECUTION OF LOUIS XVI AT MADAME TUSAUD'S: VILLIERS DE L'ISLE-ADAM'S "LES PHANTASMES DE M. REDOUX"
EVEN METAPHORS GET KILLED, DON'T THEY?
JULIEN GRACQ'S LES EAUX ÉTROITES: THE ORIGIN OF THE IMPOSSIBLE AND THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF ORIGIN.
LOST IN TRANSLATION: FROM ORATURE TO LITERATURE IN THE WEST AFRICAN FOLKTALE.
CROSSING BORDERS: LINO NOVÁS CALVO'S ¡TRINQUENME AHI A ESE HOMBRE!'.
ALLEGORIES OF SUBVERSION; HERMENEUTICS AND THE POLITICS OF CRITICAL READING: A ROMANIAN CASE.
FRIENDSHIP IN THE NOVELS OF ANDRÉE CHÉDID.
FIVE CONSIDERATIONS ON CREATIVITY AND WAR.
FROM MULTIPLICITY TO MULTITUDE: UNIVERSAL SYSTEMS OF DEFORMATION.
WE REFUGEES.
THINKING DIFFERENCE.
GENERATIONS: WOMEN'S TRADITION AND THE HANDING DOWN OF HISTORY.
REWRITING THE FEMALE DESTINY: DACIA MARAINI'S LA LUNGA VITA DI MARIANNA UCRIA.
ZENO'S LOCOMOTIVE.
PARABLES OF POSITIONING.
RECLAIMING GRAMSCI: A BRIEF SURVEY OF CURRENT AND POTENTIAL USES OF THE WORK OF ANTONIO GRAMSCI.
Rebuilding affirmative action.
A changing landscape. (cover story)
Learning curve. (cover story)
Rethinking the commerce clause.
Inadmissible lies. (cover story)
Mr. Thompson takes on Washington.
Bench stress.
Third-party problems.
Suing the firm.
Writing to the ear.
Verdict on Simpson trial.
What to wear.
Hardball discovery. (cover story)
Jury reform.
Moving mountains.
Road warriors.
Making a difference.
From courtroom to classroom.
Winning and losing.
The second time around.
Blowing smoke.
The Supreme Court goes back to work.
Chief enigma.
Of counsel.
Civil disclosure.
Finding the right words.
Powers of persuasion.
Business talk.
The blame game.
Prospecting the Internet. (cover story)
Missing and presumed murdered.
After Adarand.
Dreams really do come true.
Real reform.
Making evidence.
Speakers at the Canada-U.S. Law Institute Conference on Promoting and Protecting Innovation in a...
Introduction and history of the Canada-U.S. Law Institute.
Conference opening.
The new international competitive environment for trade in goods and services.
The new international competitive environment: A Canadian perspective.
United States governmental support for innovation.
Canadian governmental support for innovation.
Discussion after the speeches of Kent H. Hughes and Alan Nymark.
The context for innovation in Japan: Comparative competitive aspects and some practical comments.
Discussion after the speech of Thomas Klitgaard.
Trade law and innovation: Section 301 of the Trade Act and its effect on counterfeiting of U.S....
Trade and innovation: Unilateralism v. multilateralism.
Overview of recent changes in Mexican industrial property law and the enforcement of rights by...
Discussion after the speeches of Emery Simon, John Gero, and Bill F. Kryzda.
Antitrust considerations in innovation-driven markets.
Antitrust law and innovation--limits on joint research & development and inter-company...
Discussion after the speeches of Joseph Kattan and Calvin Goldman.
Innovation as part of the U.S. corporate culture: Innovation working for you.
Making innovation part of the Canadian corporate culture.
Discussion after the speeches of Ronald Mitsch and Brian Hewat.
Financing innovation in the private sector.
Venture capital and private equity: Financing innovation in the private sector.
Discussion after the speeches of Mary Macdonald and Robert Pavey.
The impact of the United States' environmental regulations on innovation.
Protecting children from lead-based paint poisoning: Should landlords bear the burden?
The waste war: Oregon Waste Systems, Inc. v. Department of Environmental Quality.
The Federal Advisory Committee Act and its failure to work effectively in the environmental context.
Circumstantial evidence and CERCLA generator liability: Are courts making summary judgment...
Cars, Congress, and clean air for the Northeast: A separation of powers analysis of the Ozone...
EPA rulemaking under the Regulatory Flexibility Act: The need for reform.
Competing identities in the Arab world.
Peace and democracy in the Middle East: The constraints of soft budgets.
External capital and political liberalizations: A typology of Middle Eastern development in the...
Sheikhs and souks: Capital market formation in the Middle East.
Peace and political reform in the Gulf: The private sector.
Rivers of conflict, rivers of peace.
Conventional arms exports and stability in the Middle East.
Middle East nuclear stability: The state of the region and the state of the debate.
Sovereignty: An introduction and brief history.
Capital mobility, state autonomy and political legitimacy.
Identity, integration and security.
Professionals and citizens in the political science polity.
Methodism and the rise of political correctness.
Rational choice.
Observations of an outsider.
Behavioralism, postbehavioralism, and the reemergence of political philosophy.
Nietzscheanism contra Nietzsche.
Heidegger and postmodernism.
The postmodern problem.
Nietzsche, Heidegger, and the deflections of postmodernism.
The state of our malaise.
Political science.
From `holocaust' to `rational choice'.
The biography of a social science.
The rebirth of political socialization.
New directions for political socialization research.
Psychological theory as a basis for political socialization research.
Reframing the meaning of `political' in research with adolescents.
The coming great powers competition.
Ireland: Two states, two nations.
Revitalizing the special relationship.
The Vatican and Israel.
Fears and doubts in Poland.
The League of Nations and the settlement of disputes.
The League of Nations and the Great Powers, 1936-1940.
The small states at Geneva.
The League of Nations' predicament in Southeastern Europe.
The legacies of Woodrow Wilson and the League of Nations in Russia.
The Roosevelt administration and the United Nations.
The League of Nations and the question of national identity in the Fertile Crescent.
Japan and the League of Nations.
Preoperative evaluation.
Audiological profiles and Meniere's disease.
Meniere's syndrome: An approach to therapy.
Permanent restoration of hearing and vestibular function by the endolymphatic subarachnoid shunt...
Historical development of surgery for pediatric laryngeal stenosis.
Invasive fungal sinusitis in the immunocompromised pediatric patient.
Spindle cell carcinoma of the pyriform sinus: A case report.
Osteoradionecrosis of the hyoid induced by combined modality therapy for laryngeal carcinoma.
A new kind of rays.
ENT product marketplace.
Nasal osteotomies--second and final part.
Tinnitus and acoustic neuromas: Analysis of the effect of surgical excision on postoperative...
Cochlear nerve section for intractable tinnitus.
Laser applications in otologic surgery.
The diagnostic value of fine needle aspiration biopsy of head and neck masses.
The use of molded tympanic heterograft (lamb peritoneum).
Embolization as the definitive treatment of epistaxis in the pediatric patient.
Tuberculous infections of the head and neck.
Branchial cleft cyst posterior to the carotid vessels.
Streptococcal pharyngitis: Alternative treatments.
The current status of expanded polytetrafluoroethylene...
Audiogram construction using frequency--Specific auditory...
Retropharyngeal Abscess: Clinical review.
The use of addition reaction silicone materials in the...
Functional parathyroid cyst and hypocalciuric hypercalcemia.
Malignant oncocytoma of the lacrimal sac: Ultrastructure and...
Voice abnormalities in short stature syndromes.
Airway obstruction in children with infectious mononucleosis.
A pathway for information transmission to the ear.
Overexpression of the p53 in laryngeal carcinoma: Clinicopathological implications.
Atypical forms of paroxysmal positional nystagmus.
The Early Screening Project for young children with behavior problems.
Peer ratings of internalizing and externalizing problems in inpatient and elementary school...
The influence of rate of presentation during taped-words interventions on reading performance.
Waterborne disease surveillance.
Incinerator air emissions.
A case study.
NEHA/CIEH sabbatical exchange program 1994-part1.
Venous thromboembolic disease and combined oral contraceptives...
Effect of different progestagens in low oestrogen oral...
Risk of idiopathic cardiovascular death and nonfatal venous...
Enhancement by factor V Leiden mutation of risk of deep-vein...
Efficacy of traction for non-specific low back pain: A...
Waiting for coronary artery bypass surgery: Population-based...
Increased vulnerability of the subendocardium to ischaemic...
Cholesterol, diastolic blood pressure, and stroke: 13 000...
Randomised, double-blind trial of intravenous diltiazem...
Mortality of cadaveric kidney transplantation versus...
Breast cancer imaging with radiolabelled peptide from...
Prospective randomised study of effect of octreotide on...
Transmission of Ebola virus (Zaire strain) to uninfected...
Natural history of untreated cytomegalovirus retinitis.
Acute bacterial meningitis.
Media wars.
Masaccio's cripple: A neurological syndrome. Its art,...
Randomised controlled trial of streptokinase, aspirin, and...
Toxic gas generation from plastic mattresses and sudden...
Mortality after prostatectomy: Selection and surgical...
Image analysis of ...-amyloid load in Alzheimer's disease...
Haematogenous dissemination of prostatic epithelial cells...
Acute renal failure.
Rehabilitation research and development in physical medicine in Japan: A historical and...
Energy expenditure during ambulation in dysvascular and traumatic below-knee amputees: A...
Gait initiation of persons with below-knee amputation: The characterization and comparison of...
The prediction of metabolic energy expenditure during gait from mechanical energy of the limb: A...
The effects of thigh soft-tissue stiffness on the control of anterior tibial displacement by...
Design methodology for a multifunctional hand prosthesis.
Biomechanical basis of choosing the rational mass and its distribution throughout the lower limb...
An above-knee prosthesis with a system of energy recovery: A technical note.
Stress distribution in the ankle-foot orthosis used to correct pathological gait.
Peak and submaximal physiologic responses following electrical stimulation leg cycle ergometer...
Wheelchair stability: Effect of body position.
The effect of prosthetic alignment on relative limb loading in persons with trans-tibial...
Plantar pressures with total contact casting.
A small and lightweight three-channel signal-conditioning unit for strain-gage transducers: A...
Skin response to mechanical stress: Adaptation rather than breakdown--a review of the literature.
Phase plane analysis of stability in quiet standing.
Asymmetry in walking performance and postural sway in patients with chronic unilateral cerebral...
Strain-based fatigue analysis of wheelchairs on a double roller fatigue machine.
Power wheelchair range testing and energy consumption during fatigue testing.
An augmented computer vision approach for enhanced image understanding.
Ultrasonic head controller for powered wheelchairs.
Scientific study and political reaction.
A proper role and realistic expectations for science.
Queer studies: In search of a discipline.
Partisan revelry at the advocacy conference.
Multiculturalism and the decline of Stanford.
Should alumni remain silent?
Peter Novick and the `Objectivity Question' in history.
Willful distortions of history.
From the editor's desk.
Future studies in the academy.
`Shameless Acts' revisited: Some questions for Martha Nussbaum.
Flights of fancy: Science, reason, and common sense.
Are the social sciences scientific?
Middle Eastern studies: What went wrong?
Adventures in wonderland.
Is racism a western idea?
The end of the book?
Farewell to the chief.
Walking through different groves with Sir George.
The new Confucianism in Beijing.
What's the story?
Dissing the middle class: The view from Burns Park.
My friend Edward.
Violence and artistic representation in John James Audubon.
Stolen shadows, lost souls: Body and soul in photography.
Nixon as literary artifact.
Darwin and pain: Why science made Shakespeare nauseating.
Indecision: Some abandoned reflections.
Auguste Rodin.
Red Meat.
The politics of cultural freedom: India in the nineteen fifties.
The puppet's calling.
Memory and autobiography.
Psychoanalysis and the future of fear.
Text of U.S. Supreme Court decision:
Negligence, coercion, and the protection of religious belief.
Theological integrity.
David, Bat Sheva, and the fifty-first psalm.
Sacrifice and social maintenance: What's at stake in the (non-)ordination of Roman Catholic women.
Can you play? The reconstruction of instruction.
Education of the heart.
Re-enchanting the world: Education, wisdom, and imagination.
Toward a just and compassionate society: A Jewish view.
Toward a just and compassionate society: A Christian view.
The politics of ownership.
Beyond state and market: Christianity and the future of economic democracy.
Laughter and the absurd economy of celebration.
Empowering the peoples in their United Nations.
Toward a liberative interreligious dialogue.
Is Islam threatened by Christianity?
Miriam's way.
Exile and memory: Reflections on Tisha B'Av.
`Atmosphere', matching, and logic in syllogistic reasoning.
Tolerance of ambiguity: A review of the concept, its...
Pornography and sexual aggression.
Change in affective state assessed by impaired color-naming of...
Coping with threatened identities: Unemployed people's...
Theory and evidence bearing on a scale of trait arousability.
Can experimentally induced mood affect optimism and pessimism scores?
Triangulation as splitting in the service of ambivalence.
Perfectionism, life events, and depressive symptoms: A test of a diathesis-stress model.
Content validity: A neglected strategy for developing managerial selection tests?
Recall of aggressive and withdrawn statements among young children: Social schema or meaningfulness.
Influence of job type, job status, and gender on achievement motivation.
Open season on Nairobi's street kids.
Understanding and managing abnormal behavior: The need for a new clinical science.
Factors influencing employee association members' votes for unionization.
Liberal or conservative? Gender, identity, and perception of historical religious positions.
Relationships among job involvement, job satisfaction, and organizational commitment for nurses.
Counselor conceptual level and counseling: A reappraisal.
Effects of adult attachment style on the perception and search for social support.
The relationship between graduate student attitudes and attrition.
The perception of risk over time as a factor influencing attitudes toward children with physical...
Crisis calls and temporal and lunar variables: A comprehensive examination.
Operationalizing religious orientation: Iron rods and compasses.
Chaotic analysis in psychology and psychoanalysis.
The beliefs of members of the American Psychiatric Association on the etiology of male...
Assessing filial maturity through the use of the Filial Anxiety Scale.
Situation or person? Contrasting the effects of budget constraints and individual values on...
Academic goals and emotions: A test of two models.
Why students withdraw from classes.
The rise and fall of the savannah theory.
Human ancestors in wetlands ecosystems.
The primary human disease.
Aquatic ape theory, the brain cortex, and language origins.
Mythological traces of aquatic human ancestry.
Exceptional human experiences and the experiential paradigm.
The parapsychology of God.
Intuition: A link between psi and spirituality.
Spirituality in the natural and social worlds.
FACE-ing the future. (cover story)
Anatomy of a snowflake.
Tackling wheat take-all.
STEEP solutions to soil erosions.
Alcatraz for animal disease.
Animal research and care go hand in hand.
DNA sequencing is new tool for insect detectives.
Mayaguez lab helps farmers in the tropics.
Satellite link to improved farm practices.
Beyond methyl bromide.
IPM goes areawide. (cover story)
Sheep at home on the wild summer range.
Monitoring methane.
Gotcha!
Success secrets of desert plants.
Reinventing systematics. (cover story)
Nutrient accountants.
Getting the lowdown on worms.
Metal-scavenging plants to cleanse the soil.
Irradiation helps keep meat safe.
Treasure houses of uncommon foods. (cover story)
Managing change in irrigated agriculture.
Joint venture pays Ag dividends. (cover story)
A Fantesk-tic starch-oil combo.
Boosting plants' virus resistance.
Civil-Military Relations Reconsidered: A Theory of Concordance.
Civil-Military Relations in Ukraine, 1989-1991.
The Nature of Athenian Hoplite Democracy.
Military Decision in War: A Framework for Research.
Schools, Enlistment, and Military Values: The Australian Services Cadet Scheme.
Saddam Surprises the United States: Learning from "The Revolution of August 2"
Peacekeeping Doctrine and Conflict Resolution Techniques.
Proliferation and Peace: An Agnostic View.
Military Service and Racial Attitudes of White Veterans.
Soldiers and Marines at Chosin Reservoir: Criteria for Assignment to Combat Command.
Science and the Magic Eye: Innovations in the Selection of Canadian Army Officers, 1939-1945.
Year end review of recycling.
Resort composting keeps costs down.
Biosolids composting maintains steady growth.
Gaining public acceptance for beneficial use of biosolids.
Odor policy for composting facilities.
Practical applications of on-farm composting technology.
Hospital recycling moves ahead.
Continued growth for variable rates.
MSW composting at the crossroads.
Success with source separated.
Strategies for commercial organics diversion.
Standardized test for evaluation of compost self-heating.
Urban wood markets in the Northwest.
Unraveling the biodegradable plastics maze.
Integrated processing at future recycling park.
Seattle recycling revisited.
Large-scale composting of biosolids and yard trimmings.
Compost is key to theme park's beauty.
The compost story: From soil enrichment to pollution remediation.
Commercial applications for compost biofilters.
Principles of soil bioremediation.
Feasibility of large-scale organics diversion.
California finalizes compost regulations.
Composting regulations stir up California farmers.
Big diversion from C&D debris.
Online connections for recyclers and composters.
Special diversion methods for special events.
Compost facilities diversify and build markets.
Grind and transfer strategies.
Degradation of explosive propellants by in-vessel composting.
Collecting and transporting food residuals.
Organic farms and urban yard trimmings.
Composting on Pennsylvania farms.
Beneficial use of paper mill sludge.
Standardized microcosms in microbial risk assessment.
Wilderness-related environmental outcomes of adventure and ecology education programming.
Field trips and follow-up activities: Fourth graders in a public garden.
Strengths and weaknesses of teacher environmental education preparation in Wisconsin.
The influence of acculturation on environmental concerns: An exploratory study.
Children's environmental attitude and knowledge scale: Construction and validation.
Changing perceptions of nature, self, and others: A report on a park/school program.
Exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses of an environmental attitude scale (EAS) for...
Interpreters' conceptions of Australian Aboriginal culture and heritage: Implications for...
Development of a curriculum framework for water education for educators, scientists, and...
The effects of an environmental studies course on selected variables related to environmentally...
Behaviorist EE research: Environmentalism as individualism.
Environmental medicine education in the United States.
Trust in sources of technical information.
An environmental course for an undergraduate business program.
The Black-White environmental concern gap: An examination of environmental paradigms.
Exploring the underlying constructs of basic concepts in environmental education.
Sustainable trade.
Bulgaria at a crossroads.
Industrial ecology.
The future of populous economies China and India shape their destinies. (cover story)
Biodiversity and health: Prescription for progress.
Rethinking Development Assistance for Renewable Electricity Sources.
Pathways to Sustainability. The Evolving Role of Transnational Institutions.
Spectrum.
Climate Change and World Food Supply and special issues of Global Environmental Change and Food Policy.
Frameworks for choice.
Voices from the developing world.
Determined opposition.
Thought for the morrow.
Trade and the environment.
Financing environmentally sound development.
High-density data storage using proximal probe techniques.
Some thoughts about scanning probe microscopy, micromechanics and storage.
Use of multiple representations for simulating cloth...
Design of a solid-state file using flash EEPROM.
Modeling and characterization of long on-chip...
Species trends in sport fisheries, Monterey Bay, Calif., 1959-86.
Skimmers: Their development and use in coastal Louisiana.
The threatened status of steller sea lions, Eumetopias jubatus, under the Endangered Species Act...
The bowhead whale, Balaena mysticetus: Its historic and current status.
Temporal changes in a tropical nekton assemblage and performance of a prawn selective gear.
Australian vessel performance in the East Coast tuna longline fishery.
New products.
Generating the sounds of silence.
Capturing design data with digitizing systems.
Purdue looks beyond the 1990s.
MIT emphasizes smart design.
Building natural gas locomotives.
New products.
Hybrid car promises high performance and low emissions.
Even flat, these tires keep working.
Agile manufacturing in a responsive factory.
Developing a flexible automated fixturing device.
Transferring solid model data.
A design must not be judged as a concept.
New products.
Prototyping with advanced tools.
Brushless motors find their niche.
Threading glass for strong sealings.
Turbines for the turn of the century.
Embedding knowledge in robot controllers.
The ASME link.
New products.
New products.
Cleaning soil without incineration.
Improving medical waste disposal.
Engine makers tap carbon-carbon pistons.
Building an aluminum car.
Computer-based training keeps MEs current.
Quality engineering with FEA and DOE.
Developing a hydraulic pulse generator.
What does the public need to know about science?
Emissaries to the stars: The astronomers of ancient Maya.
Bullion and billon: The astronomical images on old coins.
Galaxy or fuzzy patch.
Galaxies that go bump in the night.
To Mars by way of the school house.
An open letter to the astronomical community, from the director of the Astronomical Observatory...
Rally around the ring.
Pulsars, planets, and genetics.
The science of knowing God.
Flame throwers of the galaxy.
Clusters, lensing and the future of the universe.
Some gains, a long way to go. (cover story)
Participation in science by minorities. (cover story)
No matter what others think, you can reach the stars. (cover story)
Science in the closet.
They are out to get us.
Things bright and creatures small.
Peering into peer review.
A brief history of quantized time.
Astronomy at the cultural crossroads.
The prodigal sister. (cover story)
The double life.
The astronomer's disease.
Boyle's law and Darwin's details.
The Milky Way bar.
Clover Lick barrens, Indiana.
A muttonbird in the hand.
La arribada.
Calls of the wild.
The early bird gives the sperm.
Child's play.
The wombat digs in.
Waimea Canyon to Alakai Swamp, Kauai, Hawaii.
Spin doctoring Darwin.
A sea horse for all races.
Blood relations.
Sounds of light and hope. (cover story)
Bob Marley live.
A world apart.
Sewee Shell Mound, South Carolina.
The smart gorilla's recipe book.
The great western and the fighting Temeraire.
Hammerhead city.
The place where Vodun was born. (cover story)
Rhythms of a desert lizard.
Rascals, survivors, dreamers.
Fossils by the sea.
Turner's Hall Woods, Barbados.
Diary of a Museum Naturalist.
The evolved imagination.
Reversing established orders.
Swimming with salmon.
The fundamental physical constants.
Nobel Prize in Physics goes to Frederick Reines for detection of the neutrino...
...and Martin Perl wins for discovering the tau lepton.
What future will we choose for physics?
Scanning force microscopy in biology.
Eugene Paul Wigner: A towering figure of modern physics.
Symmetry in physics: Wigner's legacy.
New gamma detector array finds evidence of hyperdeformed nuclei.
Wilhelm Conrad Rontgen and the glimmer of light.
Recent applications of x rays in condensed matter physics.
X rays in molecular biophysics.
X rays in medicine.
X rays from the rest of the universe.
PhD programs II: NRC's new pecking order sets off crowning and puts some danders up.
Oscillating granular layers produce stripes, squares, hexagons...
Space-based telescopes see primordial helium in spectra of distant quasars.
Quantum information and computation.
Helioseismology.
Julian Schwinger: Prodigy, problem solver, pioneering physicist.
Despite nuclear tests by France and China, prospects rise for comprehensive test ban.
A model of turbulence.
Where does the proton really get its spin?
Acoustic wavefronts in crystalline solids.
The role of science in our society.
PCAST meets its boss at last at third meeting, then Clinton receives an irate letter from Walker.
What changes lie in store for US graduate physics education?
PSA International Conference of Photography program listing.
An analysis of judging.
Let's try printing from slides.
How to enter and win photo contests.
Video editing.
Exotic ports of the orient.
Colonial Williamsburg -- where the past meets the present.
Detergent fractional dimensions.
Programs & presenters.
An analysis of judging.
What is a portrait?
Maximizing color slide division services.
New tools.
How to make and use a Harris shutter.
Marketing your photography.
Dorothea Lange.
Pictorial photography with infrared film.
March through time.
Manifesto for digital imaging and manipulation.
Who's who 1994.
Slot canyons of Arizona.
Photographing the computer screen.
A look back at Williamsburg.
The lithographic/diazochrome connection.
Awards and honor recipients.
The spice of the exhibition.
Taking the Cayuse challenge.
Photographing gymnastics.
Journey through Tibet.
News notes.
Carpe diem.
News notes.
News notes.
Global climate change in the Great Lakes: How will agriculture in the Great Lakes region be...
Seeds in a sock.
Developing science activities: Millions of ideas available.
Introduction.
Providing access to linguistically diverse students.
Academic persistence and achievement of remedial students in a community college's college...
Quality undergraduate education: Miami-Dade Community College's teaching/learning project.
ERIC review--perspectives and perceptions: The use of part-time faculty in community colleges.
Service-learning and the institutional mission of community colleges.
A marketing approach to distance education technology: A statewide survey.
Identifying the strangers: Exploring part-time faculty integration in American community colleges.
Self-assessing general education outcomes at a community college.
Marketing the community college starts with understanding students' perspectives.
Making the transition: Understanding the adjustment process of community college transfer students.
The learning society: How shall community colleges respond?
Faculty in graduate programs in community college education.
ERIC review: Measuring success through assessment and testing.
The application of marketing theory to community college faculty recruitment: An empirical test.
The learning styles of community college art students.
The relationship of quality of effort and estimate of knowledge gain among community college...
Measuring student outcomes in postsecondary vocational education: Using wage record data.
The elusive search for funding: Financial aid in community colleges.
A COMPARISON OF TEACHER EFFICACY FOR PRE AND IN-SERVICE TEACHERS IN SCOTLAND AND AMERICA. (cover story)
BURY THE LIBERAL VS. PROFESSIONAL ARTS DEBATE.
ESSENTIAL ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN EDUCATION.
A study of visual models on mental computation of fractions for pre-service elementary teachers.
The effect of gender and age on PPST performance in an urban teacher education program.
Historical Black Colleges and Universities: Civilian and military leadership.
School vouchers--panacea or Pandora's box?
Qualitative research inquiry: Issues of power and ethics.
The Accelerated Schools inquiry process: Teacher empowerment through action research.
Enhancing career development through career day programs.
The effects of experience on teachers' attitudes toward incorporating special students into the...
A research study designed to improve the preparation of social studies teachers.
An empirical study of student recruitment in teacher education.
Factors which contribute to school administrators' hiring decisions.
Examining the negative effects of retention in our schools.
The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale--revised, revisited.
Comparing the attributes of proactive and reactive school principals.
Examining the excellence of German schools and their teacher preparation program.
A culturally diverse field experience setting for preservice teachers.
What every teacher should know about the functions of learning in the human brain.
Comparison of CIS curricula in Russian and American universities.
Preparation for role changes in general education and special education: Dual certification...
Teacher attitudes toward inclusion: Implications for teacher education in schools 2000.
Dropping the barriers in kindergarten: Cultural awareness...
Towards the nonstochastic recalibration of the teacher...
Cosmic consciousness: An essential element for democratic leadership.
Computer tutoring as a method of teaching computer skills to human service professionals.
The paradox of the educated Mexican American.
Student evaluation of social skills.
Are those preparing to teach prepared to teach critical thinking?
Social studies: Integrating school and society.
Should schools employ behavior management consultants?
Panel discussions as a means of enhancing student directed learning.
What do introductory psychology students know about their examinations, and when do they know it?
An alternative to deficit personality labeling of children.
Animal demonstrations of human conditions for the...
Kids, computers and constructivism.
Enhancing computer graphics through metaphorical...
Cooperative learning versus competition: Which is better?
The relationship of teacher empowerment and principal...
Motivation and cognition of preservice teachers: MSLQ.
Retaining ethnic minority faculty at institutions of...
China and Hong Kong: A clash of ideology.
Developing curriculum for grandmothers.
A strategy for deciding when interventions should occur...
Multicultural gifted education: A wakeup call to the profession.
Reflections on the development of gifted education in Nigeria.
Portraits of resilience: The urban life experience of gifted Latino young men.
Computerized adaptive math tests for elementary talent development selection.
A comparison of self-reported parenting behaviors and attitudes of parents of academically...
Staff development through videotapes in gifted education.
Community challenge: Enhancing the academic achievement of children and youth.
On the nature of giftedness and talent: Imposing order on chaos.
Affective and motivational considerations in the assessment of gifted learners.
Can the BRIGANCE screens detect children who are gifted and academically talented?
Correlates of phonological awareness: Implications for gifted education.
Self-concept and gifted girls: A cross sectional study of intellectually gifted females in grades...
International gifted women: Developing a critical human resource.
Meeting state mandates for gifted and talented: Iowa teacher preparation programs.
The philosophy of French funetics: An essay in applied gifted intelligence.
Formative evaluation of the Chinese high gifted education program.
Teacher certification and endorsement in gifted education: A critical need.
Parenting for achievement.
COOPERATING COMPETITORS: TEXEL FISHERMEN AND THEIR ORGANIZATIONS (C.1870-1930).
EXPLOSIVE DEBATES: DYNAMITE, TRADITION, AND THE STATE.
INTRODUCTION: PRACTICE AND REPRESENTATION IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF EFFICACY.
LICENSE TO PRACTICE? A VIEW FROM THE RAIN FOREST.
HIPPOCRATES IN THE BUSH.
FIRST AID, SECOND THOUGHTS, THIRD WORLD: REFLECTIONS ON MEDICAL BRICOLAGE.
SHAMANISTIC JOURNEYS AND ANTHROPOLOGICAL TRAVELS.
YOU KILLED MY BABY!: THE DILEMMAS OF MEDICAL INTERVENTION DURING FIELDWORK.
WORMS, WITCHCRAFT, AND WILD INCANTATIONS: THE CASE OF THE CHICKEN SOUP CURE.
COLLECTING MEDICAL SPECIMENS IN SOUTH AMERICA: A DILEMMA IN MEDICAL ETHICS.
HEALING DILEMMAS.
MEDICINE, LAND LOSS, AND THE GUARANI.
CONCLUDING DISCUSSION: THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS HEALER.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
IS "CLOSER AND CLOSER" EVER CLOSE ENOUGH? DEREIFICATION, DIACRITICAL POWER, AND THE SPECTER OF EVOLUTIONISM.
HAOLE-ING IN THE WIND: ON THE RHETORIC OF IDENTITY ANTHROPOLOGY.
The Venezuelan Andes and the geographical imagination.
Border-city idee fixe.
Recollections of Carl Sauer and research in Latin America.
Carl Sauer's vision of an institute for Latin American studies.
Carl Sauer and native American population size.
`A dark obverse': Maya survival in Guatemala.
The Spanish province of San Salvador in the mid-sixteenth century.
Local struggles over rain-forest conservation in Alaska and Amazonia.
Welfare Reform: The Bad, the Ugly, and the Maybe Not Too Awful.
DEPRESSION OR GRIEF?
Re-defining the role of physical activity courses in the preparation of physical education...
Inservice physical educators' stages of concerns: A test of Fuller's model and the TCQ--PE.
Bloodborne pathogen control efforts for physical education and athletic programs in Southern States.
Critical factors in the attainment of intercollegiate coaching and management positions.
Physical education for students with fetal alcohol syndrome.
Multicultural education for native American students in physical education.
Coaches: Listening to your players.
Include safety in physical education: Do not exclude students with disabilities.
Multicultural education in physical education: A study of knowledges, attitudes and experiences.
The life and contributions of Luther Halsey Gulick.
Game adaptation: Essential to health integration within physical education.
Weight-related attitudes and practices of adolescent males.
Confidential issues.
Analyzing and modifying coaching behaviors by means of computer aided observation.
Employment trends in kinesiology/physical education higher education: 1988-1992.
Consumer needs in physical education and athletics in higher education.
Factors affecting the enrollment and persistence of African-American doctoral students.
Physical educators and speech-language pathologists: A good match for collaborative consultation.
Case-based instruction: Linking theory to practice.
An analysis of the undergraduate physical education teacher certification requirements within...
Physical education and the Four-by-Four schedule.
Foundations of Personal Fitness: Process versus product.
Higher-skilled and lower-skilled children's perceived ability and actual performance with kicking...
All quiet on the post(western) front?
Monuments in an age without heroes.
The cultural contradictions of conservatism.
Gambling away our moral capital.
Divorce American style.
What glass ceiling?
Freud and the culture wars.
Cleaning up Superfund.
How immigration harms minorities.
On Justice Clarence Thomas.
The benefits of marriage.
Content validity of the National Literary Braille Competency Test.
Springboard.
A dynamic systems approach to the development of crawling by blind and sighted infants.
State qualifications for orientation and mobility specialists working in the public school system...
Developing the national agenda for the education of children and youths with visual impairments...
The core curriculum for blind and visually impaired students, including those with additional...
Self-concepts of children with visual impairments.
Strategies and techniques used by a person who is totally deaf and blind to obtain assistance in...
Using peer sampling to set independent travel goals for older clients.
Springboard.
Policy guidance on educating blind and visually impaired students.
Understanding each other: Families, educators, and physicians.
Career education for students with visual impairments.
Using interpreters with deaf-blind clients: What professional service providers should know.
Springboard.
A self-study and in-service training program for individuals who work with people who are...
Use of dual communication boards at vocational sites by students who are deaf-blind.
Middle class rising in revolutionary America: The evidence from manners.
Children's sleep: Sketching historical change.
`The number and quality of children': Education and marital fertility in early twentieth-century...
`But it is a fine place to make money': Migration and African-American families in Cleveland...
Women's consumption and the industrial classes of eighteenth-century England.
Working-class masculinity, middle-class morality, and labor politics in the Chilean copper mines.
`Disregarding the matrimonial vows': Divorce in eighteenth and early nineteenth-century Scotland.
Food riots revisited.
The Persuasive Effects of a Real and Complex Communication.
Physical Effort of Police Officers as a Determinant of Their Behavior Toward Criminals.
Rater Agreement Across Multiple Data Collection Media.
Institutional Racism: An Empirical Study.
Factors Affecting the Use of Naked Statistical Evidence of Liability.
Ethnic Differences in Women's Body Satisfaction: An Experimental Investigation.
The Effects of Two Types of Exposure on Attitudes Toward Aspects of Juvenile Delinquency.
Authoritarianism and Ethical Ideology.
Perceived Weight of Other Persons.
The Meaning of Multiculturalism in a Culturally Diverse Urban American Area.
Cooperative Learning and Peer Acceptance of Students with Learning Disabilities.
Origins of Generalized Control Expectancies: Reported Child Stress and Observed Maternal Control and Warmth.
Social Status and Aggression: A Field Study Analyzed by Survival Analysis.
Effects of Components of Personal Need for Structure on Occupational Strain.
Inferring Gender from Handwriting in Urdu and English.
Depression and Life Satisfaction in Nepal and Australia.
Intergroup Friendships: Integrated and Desegregated Schools in Northern Ireland.
Church Attendance, Denomination, and Suicide Ideology.
Some Effects of Sex, Age, and Household Structure on Family Drawings of Barbadian Children.
Group Relative Deprivation: Cognitive Versus Affective Components and Protest Orientation Among Indian South Africans.
Factors Affecting the Learning of English as a Second Language in Israel.
Ratings of Interpersonal Conduct in Small Groups by Aggregated Peers and Self: Replicated Factor Analyses.
The Effects of Cognitive and Affective Perspective Taking on Empathic Concern and Altruistic Helping.
Social Roles, Social Norms, and Self-Presentation in the Quiz Effect of Ross, Amabile and Steinmetz.
Interpersonal Attraction in Relation to the Loss-Gain Hypothesis.
The Orthogonality of Liberalism and Conservatism Among American Evangelical Protestants.
Work-Family Conflict Among Married Professional Women in Malaysia.
Of Secrecy and the Commonplace: Witchcraft and Power in Soweto.
Coping with acute stress among American and Australian basketball referees.
Alternative masculinity and its effects on gender relations in the subculture of skateboarding.
After the fall: Reflections on injured classical ballet dancers.
Environmental effects on ratings of perceived exertion in males and females.
Relationships among performance expectations, anxiety, and performance in collegiate volleyball...
Predicting performance from a triathlon event.
An Older Adult Exercise Status Inventory: Reliability and validity.
Competitive orientations and motives of adult sport and exercise participants.
A computer-assisted analysis of verbal coaching behavior in soccer.
Body mass index and athletic performance in elite female gymnasts.
Learned helplessness and basketball playoff performance.
Implications of Gray's Three Factor Arousal Theory for the practice of basketball free-throw...
Self-regulatory characteristics of competitive swimmers as a function of skill level and gender.
A classificatory system of anxiety-inducing situations in four team sports.
Psychological skills assessment and athletic performance in collegiate rodeo athletes.
The effect of putting-confidence on putting-performance.
Perceptual flexibility and differential feedback among intercollegiate basketball coaches.
Thomas and Znaniecki and the historiography of American immigration.
Immigration history and migration studies since The Polish Peasant: International contributions.
Polonia and The Polish Peasant in Europe and America.
Emigration from a communist country--both economic and political: A post-Communist perspective.
To live amongst others: Poles and their neighbors in industrial Chicago, 1865-1930.
Image, status, mobility and integration in American society: The Polish experience.
The creation of multi-ethnic peoplehood: The Wilkeson, Washington experience.
American Slovenes and the Leftist movements in the United States in the first half of the...
`A significant part of history deals with mankind in motion'.
Racial equality in America: A dream deferred.
Ethnic identity among the Czechs and Moravians of Texas.
Unmasking the Ku Klux Klan: The Northern Movement against the KKK, 1920-1925.
Irish-American Catholics and the quest for respectability in the coming of the great war, 1900-1917.
Machine politics and the consolidation of the Roosevelt majority: The case of Italian Americans...
The representations of Indian bodies in nineteenth-century American anthropology.
An unraveling rope: The looting of America's past.
Why anthropologists study human remains.
American Indians, anthropologists, pothunters, and repatriation: Ethical, religious and political...
Repatriation: A Pawnee's perspective.
Themes in Native American spirituality.
Cultural identity, authenticity, and community survival: The politics of recognition in the...
Eliade and Hultkrantz: The European primitivism tradition.
This may be a feud, but it is not a war: An electronic, interdisciplinary dialogue on teaching...
Communicating the intangible: An Anishnaabeg story.
Voice, representation, and dialogue: The poetics of Native American spiritual traditions.
The Church of the Immaculate Conception: Inculturation and identity among the Anishnaabeg of...
American drama: Text and video.
Clergy sexual abuse in U.S. mainline churches.
The hum of omissions/the chant of vacancies: Prologue to a study of the American long poem...
African and American trade and commerce: A reflection on the consumer cultures of American and...
Internet resources for American and international studies.
`To touch the trends':Internationalizing American studies: Perspectives from Hong Kong and Asia.
The problems of teaching sociocultural competence within a foreign language course.
Getting out of one's skin and being the only person inside: Toni Morison's Tar Baby.
American studies conference in Wurzburg, Germany.
From Sykes-Picot through Bandung to Oslo: Whither the Arab world?
Zionism and water: Influences on Israel's future water policy during the pre-state period.
A rentier state's response to oil crisis: Economic reform policies in Libya.
Exploring children's territory: Ghassan Kanafani, Njabulo Ndebele and the `generation' of...
The debate on Islam and secularism in Egypt.
Philosophical origins of the Arab Ba'th Party: The work of Zaki al-Arsuzi.
Zionism, socialism and United States support for the Jewish colonization of Palestine in the 1920s.
The politics of pardon: Israel and Jonathan Pollard.
Power in numbers: A call for a census of the Palestinian people.
Islamist perspectives of regime political response: The cases of Lebanon and Palestine.
Algerian Islamists' conception of democracy.
Central Asia: A new great game?
Privatized labor in socialist enterprises: China's Baoshan iron and steel works.
Does democratization enhance or reduce Taiwan's security? A democratic-peace inquiry.
The state and Taiwan's mainland economic policy.
The development of Taiwan's commercial aircraft manufacturing industry.
Lee Teng-hui (and his successors?) versus Jiang Zemin (and his successor!): Dialectical games.
The new economic partnership between China and Singapore.
Pakistan's security in the `new world order': Going from bad to worse?
Electoral politics in Taiwan.
The Chinese military and Hong Kong.
Taiwan: The 1994 elections.
A comparative study of the Chinese educational system.
Kantor's Cant.
Affording Foreign Policy.
Eyes on Cuba.
America's Information Edge.
A Revolution in Warfare.
Asia's Empty Tank.
Somalia and the Future of Humanitarian Intervention.
Global Leadership After the Cold War.
Cuba's Long Reform.
Tough Road to Prosperity.
Saving the U.N.
Can Europe Work?
How We Lost Poland.
Postmodern Terrorism.
Chinese Realpolitik.
The Middle East: No More Treaties.
Why Yeltsin Won.
The Muslims of France.
Will Canada Unravel?
Euro Fantasies.
Misreading Reagan's Legacy.
Inflation and insouciance: The peculiar Brazilian game.
Cocaine and parallel polities in the Brazilian urban...
Decentering the regime: Culture and regional politics in...
Strikes in Argentina: Data sources and recent trends.
Databases for large Latin American companies.
NAFTA and the Political Economy of Mexico's External...
Development, Democracy, and Inequality: New Contributions...
`Decentering' a Discipline: Recent Trends in Latin...
Teaching about the influence of the Scientific Revolution and the Enlightenment on early ...
People and their environment: Searching the historical record.
Teaching about another culture: The old order Amish.
Investigating the process of culture change from an anthropological perspective.
Effects of participatory learning programs in middle and high school civic education.
A model and a case study for analyzing colonial interaction.
Using symbolism to enhance government studies.
Using the literature of Elie Wiesel and selected poetry to teach the Holocaust in the secondary...
The social studies video project.
Introducing children to economic reasoning: Some beginning lessons.
Persisting and common stereotypes in U.S. students' knowledge of Africa: A study of preservice...
Doing vodou.
Lavilokan.
Sirens and snakes.
Tap-tap, fula-fula, kia-kia.
Art and resistance.
Threads of reflection.
On looking at a vodou altar.
A matter of recognition.
Africa: The art of a continent.
Returning the curve: Africa95, Tenq, and `Seven Stories'.
Africa95 at the Museum of Mankind.
Recent exhibitions.
Art or arts?
Luba Art and the Making of History.
The loss of cultural heritage in Mali.
The art of Willie Bester.
Africus: The Johannesburg Biennale.
Learning to live without the enemy.
Magdalene Anyango N. Odundo.
Anti-semitic policy in Albert Speer's plans for the rebuilding of Berlin.
Norman Rockwell and the fashioning of American masculinity.
The Duc d'Antin, the Royal Administration of Pictures, and the Painting Competition of 1727.
Resurrecting death: Anatomical art in the cabinet of Dr. Frederik Ruysch.
Law and order in Ruben's Wolf and Fox Hunt.
Art education policy in Canada.
Technology, rationalities, and experience in school music policy: Underlying myths.
Provincial policies in arts education: Analysis of a new arts education data base.
New music education guidelines for policy administrators.
Oh dear, what can the (subject) matter be?
National Art Education Association.
Educating audiences for music: Training performers to teach.
New perspectives on audience development.
Arts standards and fragmentation: A strategy for holistic assessment.
Culture/self as subject, object, and process.
Educational restructuring and the arts in Northern Territory schools: Just another brick in the...
Critical pedagogical theory and the dance educator.
The one and the many in art education.
Assessing teacher competence in the arts: Should Mr. Holland have gotten the gig? Introduction...
Assessment and evaluation in music teacher education.
Assessing art teachers.
Act IV: Theatre teacher assessment and evaluation.
For whom the theories toil.
Lies, irony, satire, and the parody of ideology in Dona Perfecta.
Realizing the textual space: Metonymic metafiction in Juan Carlos Onetti.
Limpieza and the ghost of Americo Castro: Racism as a tool of literary analysis.
The old Spanish participle in -udo: Its origin, use, and loss.
What is popular culture? More answer to an old question.
A holistic approach to the study of popular culture: Context, text, audience, and recoding.
Popular culture: A socio-aesthetic approach.
Hybrid vigor: Popular culture in a multicultural, post-Fordist world.
Popular culture: From epic to simulacrum.
Has Latin American popular culture disappeared? Some theoretical reflections.
Theorizing popular culture studies in Uruguay.
On transculturation: Toward a political economy of culture in the periphery.
The Cuban bolero and its transculturation to Mexico: The case of Agustin Lara.
Mass media and cultural identity among the Yucatec Maya: The constitution of global, national...
Expanding the popular culture debates: Puertorriquenas, Hollywood, and cultural identity.
Bruxaria (witchcraft) and espiritismo (spiritism): Popular culture and popular religion in...
The preservation and recuperation of folklore in Venezuela.
Staging culture in Totonacapan: Spaces of recuperation/spaces of terr(or)toriality.
MENC today.
To sing or not to sing in instrumental class.
Why high school students should study the arts.
Developing critical thinkers in music.
Class guitar in middle school.
Steps toward effective assessment.
Suzuki's mother tongue method.
Helping students in the inclusive classroom.
Kodaly strategies for instrumental teachers.
Management systems for music teachers.
Conducting research in the music classroom.
Opening the door to classroom improvisation.
MENC today.
Dance in the music curriculum.
The conductor as transformational leader.
Breathing your way to a better chorus.
Satis Coleman's `creative music'.
Preparing to teach at the university level.
Teaching music in the year 2050.
Does music with a sacred text have a place in the public...
MENC today.
Building music literacy with guided composition.
Special learners with special abilities.
Tuned in to learning styles.
Enhancing aural lessons with multimedia programs.
Carefully crafting the choral rehearsal.
Idea bank.
MENC today.
Overview of discipline-based music education.
Defining new teaching roles.
Integrating the four disciplines.
Professional development and change communities.
Argus on the stage.
The collaboration of Joseph Martin Kraus and Carl Michael Bellman.
Tableau and Thanatos in Henrik Ibsen's Gengangere.
Review essay.
Norwegian crusaders and the Balearic Islands.
Reorganizing the Dnaish welfare state: 1982-93 a decade of conservative rule.
Becoming Norwegian, Sigurd Ibsen in America 1886-1888.
Saxo grammaticus.
The etymology and semantics of Old Norse Knorr `cargo ship.'
Grimur Jonsson Thorkelin's preface to the first edition of Beowulf, 1815.
Archaeology and national identity.
Hjalmar Soderberg on August Strindberg.
The Strindbergian one-act play.
Iter Scandivavicum: Foreign travelers' views of the late eighteenth-century north.
Literary sources of Hans Scherfig's Den forsvundne Fuldmogtig.
Imaging social languages in Marvell's The Last Instructions.
Translating Caradoc Evans's Welsh English.
Reader, text, and subjectivity: Toni Morrison's Beloved as Lacan's gaze qua object.
No country to call home: A study of Castillo's Mixquiahuala Letters.
Souls and apples, all in one: Bosnia as the cultural nexus in Nenad Velickovic's Konacari.
Windows of focalization: Deconstruction and reconstructing a narratological concept.
Representing experience and reasserting identity: The rhetoric of combat in british literature of ..
The art of appropriation: The rhetoric sexuality in D.H. Laurence.
Theories of metamorphosis: From metatrope to textual revision.
Gerard Genette: An Anglo-French checklist to 1996.
Part of the way with verbal play: The ludic mode in scholarly titling.
TO THE FRONTIER AND BACK: THE CENTRIFUGAL AND THE CENTRIPETAL IN CERVANTES' PERSILES Y SIGISMUNDA AND GRACIáN'S EL CRITICóN.
ANDRÉ SCHWARZ-BART'S LE DERNIER DES JUSTES: A DANGEROUS TEXT?
FALLEN WORLDS AND ARTIFICIAL TEMPLES: MATHEMATICS' REDEMPTIVE ROLE IN THE WORK OF RAYMOND QUENEAU.
FEMININE SEMIOTICS AND MASCULINE DESIRES: COURTOIS D'ARRAS AND THE PROPER MALE READER IN THE MIDDLE AGES.
THE ARCHETYPAL WOMAN FULFILLED: ISIS, HARMONY OF FLESH/SPIRIT/LOGOS.
BEYOND THE BOUNDARIES: STAËL, GENLIS, AND THE IMPOSSIBLE "FEMME CÉLÈBRE".
THE POLITICS OF CLEANLINESS IN NORTHERN RENAISSANCE ITALY.
MARIA AND HER MOTHER: CONFLICT AND CONTINUITY IN MARIA CHAPDELAINE.
THE GENDERING OF SPACE IN CHATEAUBRIAND'S COMBOURG: ARCHETYPAL ARCHITECTURE AND PATRIARCHAL OBJECT.
The lawyer turns peacemaker. (cover story)
What every lawyer needs to know.
Packing heat.
Budgeting boom.
The shifting sands of free speech.
Winning on a shoestring. (cover story)
Stop monkeying around.
Generations.
Defend and tell.
Higher authorities.
The price of speaking out. (cover story)
Out-of-office experiences.
They blinded me with science!
What Sylvia Law, Jonathan Pazer and David Glass confront when they read or write.
Judging Leon Higginbotham.
The view from the minors.
Introduction and history of the Canada-U.S. Law Institute.
Conference opening.
An assessment: Where we stand today in terms of the development and utilization of human...
Human resources in Canada: The impact of NAFTA on human resources.
Discussion after the speeches of Peter Pestillo and Gordon Betcherman.
Introduction: The role of governments in the development of human resources training for...
The role of governments in the development of human resources training for employability: The...
The role of governments in the development of human resources training for employability: The...
Discussion after the speeches of Marie-Louise Caravatti and Yves Poisson.
Where do we stand vis a vis our major competitors in the development of human resources?
Discussion after the speech of Phyllis Eisen.
Legal aspects of human resources in the Canada/U.S. context: A comparative look at hiring...
Legal aspects of human resources in the Canada/U.S. context: A comparative look at hiring...
Discussion after the speeches of Robert B. Cottington and Roy L. Heenan.
The role of incentives, profit sharing, and employee participation in the development of human...
The role of incentives, profit sharing, and employee participation in the development of human...
Discussion after the speeches of Donald Hastings and Michael McDermott.
Developing a corporate culture for the maximum balance between the utilization of human resources...
Developing a corporate culture for the maximum balance between the utilization of human resources...
Discussion after the speeches of Richard Lidstad and Margaret Kerr.
Labor in the international economy.
Discussion after the speech of John S. McKennirey.
NAFTA cross-border provision of services.
NAFTA--temporary entry provisions--immigration dimensions.
Discussion after the speeches of James McIlroy and Ellen G. Yost.
New England and the challenge of interstate ozone pollution under the Clean Air Act of 1990.
Two cheers for shifting the presumption of validity: A reply to Professor Hopperton.
Conditional federal grants: Can the government undercut lobbying by nonprofits through...
Something old, something new: Applying the public trust doctrine to snowmaking.
Looking back: The full-time baseline in regulatory takings analysis.
The worldwide rise of religious nationalism.
Religious fundamentalism and human rights.
Terrorism in the name of religion.
Where hope and history rhyme--prospects for peace in Northern Ireland?
Religion and politics in Jerusalem.
The Middle East: In search of an equilibrium between transcendent idealism & practicality.
A theology of insurrection? Religion and politics in Mexico.
African churches in social transformation.
Religion, conflict and prospects for reconciliation in Bosnia, Croatia and Yugoslavia.
The ruined center: Religion and mass politics in India.
A more sensible approach to regulating independent...
The First Amendment comes of age: The emergence of free...
Liberalism's virtue.
Two theories of toleration.
Race and the forging of liberalism.
Tocqueville on liberalism's liberation of women.
The rise and fall of American technology policy.
Regime change, elite players, and foreign policy in Portugal, 1960-1991.
Playing partisan games.
Japanese elites and foreign policy in the era of emerging Asian power.
The "Realism" of Augustine's "Political Realism".
The Master Fool.
History and Nature.
The politics of confusion in international relations theory.
The relevance crisis of contemporary congressional research.
Stalin's role in the coming of World War II: The international debate goes on.
Ukraine's niche in the U.S. launch market.
Ghana: Lurching toward economic rationality.
Will Russia be crushed by its history?
America the beautiful Europe.
Blue helmets and black schemes.
Unsheathing the sword?
Revisiting Fukuyama.
Stalin's role in the coming of World War II.
U.S. Intelligence priorities in the post-Cold War era.
Seven days in Havana.
The Clinton administration and peacemaking in civil conflicts.
Radical democracy.
Western Europe: A federal destiny?
Argon laser and Gherini-Causse Endo-Otoprobe in otologic surgery.
Ancient Schwannoma of the submandibular gland: A case report.
Vocal fold hemorrhage.
Parapharyngeal lymphangioma mimicking a peritonsillar abscess.
Atypical intranasal foreign body.
Errors in otology.
Iatrogenic facial paralysis prevention.
Iatrogenic facial nerve injury: Prevalence and predisposing factors.
Iatrogenic facial palsy: The cost.
Bilateral fat graft myringoplasty in children. (cover story)
Cicatricial pemphigoid of the larynx: A case report of...
Hearing and Sjogren's syndrome. (cover story)
Diagnosis and management of complications of self-injection... (cover story)
Cervical thymic cysts. (cover story)
Solitary fibrous tumor of the parapharyngeal space: A case... (cover story)
Continuous Quality Improvement in otolaryngology.
Retrolabyrinthine selective posterior root section of the trigeminal nerve for the treatment of...
The management of post-thyroidectomy hypocalcemia.
Cyclic alternating pattern sequences in non-apneic snorers with and without nasal dilation.
Renal clear cell carcinoma appearing as a left neck mass.
Nasal septal necrosis mimicking Wegener's granulomatosis in a cocaine abuser.
Ethics, resource allocation, and managerial decision making.
The proletarianization of Dr. Gaylis.
Business reengineering, information technology, and the healthcare connection.
Redefining the healthcare paradigm.
Problem solving in health services organizations.
Hardiness, job stress, and health in nurses.
Luck of the draw.
Patients' assessment of medical care quality.
The Canadian healthcare system: The future of American healthcare?
Confidentiality, privacy, and restrictions for computer-based patient records.
A strategic human resource management model for restructuring in healthcare organizations.
Facilities design in a managed care environment.
Benefits and disadvantages of corporate restructuring.
Executives' perceptions of total quality improvement.
The quality coach.
Malaria and resistance genes--they work in wondrous ways.
Randomised trial of effect of alendronate on risk of fracture in women with existing vertebral...
Birthweight as a risk factor for breast cancer.
Randomised trial of MNrgp120 HIV-1 vaccine in symptomless HIV-1 infection.
Randomised crossover trial of naltrexone in uraemic pruritus.
Therapeutic delivery of proteins to macrophages: Implications for treatment of Gaucher's disease.
Unravelling of the molecular mechanisms of kidney stones.
A visiting doctor's perspective in Afghanistan: Poverty, civil war, and private medicine.
Randomised trial of surgery alone versus radiotherapy followed by surgery for potentially operable l
Randomised trial of surgery alone versus surgery followed by radiotherapy for mobile cancer of the
Epidemiology of colonisation of patients and environment with vancomycin-resistant enterococci.
Effect of hydroxyethylstarch in brain-dead kidney donors on renal function in kidney-transplant reci
Thunderclap headache as first symptom of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis.
Association between fulminant hepatic failure and a strain of GBV virus C.
Germany.
Randomised trial of nadolol alone or with isosorbide mononitrate for primary prophylaxsis of varicea
A population-based study of the usefulness of screening for neuroblastoma.
Randomised trial of the effect of co-administration with acellular pertussis DTP vaccine...
Survey of Norwegian doctors' cultural activities.
Solar disinfection of drinking water and diarrhoea in Maasai children: A controlled field trial.
Electrical spinal-cord stimulation for painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy.
Popular therapeutics and medical preferences in rural north India.
Chou Ch'en's street character: Facial deformity in the art of the Ming Dynasty.
Randomised study of screening for colorectal cancer with faecal-occult-blood test.
Parametric analysis using the finite element method to investigate prosthetic interface stresses...
Indentor tests and finite element modeling of bulk muscular tissue in vivo.
A review of prosthetic interface stress investigations.
Design of a 3-D surface scanner for lower limb prosthetics: A technical note.
Shoulder belt anchor location influences on wheelchair occupant crash protection.
Development of test methodologies for determining the safety of wheelchair headrest systems...
An electronic device to measure drive and recovery phases during wheelchair propulsion: A...
Clinical analysis of a CAD/CAM system for custom seating: A comparison with hand-sculpting methods.
An equivalent input noise level criterion for hearing aids.
Gain, frequency response, and maximum output requirements for hearing aids.
Comparative effectiveness of videothermography, contact thermography, and infrared beam...
Obesity and metabolic disorders in adults with lower limb amputation.
Relationships of the vibromyogram to the surface electromyogram of the human rectus femoris...
Factors associated with life satisfaction among a sample of persons with neurotrauma.
Chair rise strategy in the functionally impaired elderly.
The obstacle course: A tool for the assessment of functional balance and mobility in the elderly.
Group preference put to the vote.
A reversal for affirmative action.
The two sides to affirmative action.
Sandra Cisneros: Form over content.
A new cultural agenda for the National Museum of the American Indian.
The essential mission: Teaching undergraduates.
The culmination of student freedom.
The foibles of FIPSE.
Deliberations on The End of Racism.
Racial and sexual politics in testing.
Symposium: A look at the life of Sidney Hook.
The Sidney Hook Memorial Award address: Speaking truth to power.
The veteran and the neo-progressive campus.
Learning disabilities in the academy: A professor's guide.
Epistemological correctness in English 101.
Merit-based admissions and diversity at the University of California.
The National History Standards.
The strange fate of the American boarding school.
An autobiographer's lies.
Life with father.
Losing the thread in Japan.
Is music unspeakable?
What should we ask about intelligence?
An earring for erring.
Rosina.
Welcome to post-culturalism.
Front and back: Politics and letters.
Auden, Hogarth, and The Rake's Progress.
Reflections on scholarly editing.
Jean Genet: `Une solitude mortelle'.
Tahiti.
The inspirational value of great works of literature.
Anti-Intellectualism.
The blind side of the Akedah.
Up close, in touch.
How do you beat the devil?
The O'Brian touch.
The teaching life.
Universal pastor: President Bill Clinton's civil religion.
The Christians in socialism--and after: The church in East Germany.
`All matters and things relating to religion and morality': The Virginia Burgesses' Committee for...
U.S.-Vatican relations: Toward a post-Cold War convergence?
From accommodation to decision: Transformations in Israel's religio-political life.
Resisting or embracing reform? South Africa's democratic transition and NGK-state relations.
Evangelicals and Catholics in El Salvador: Evolving religious responses to social change.
Notes on church-state affairs: United States.
Christian faith and political involvement in today's culture war.
Notes on church-state affairs: United States.
Text of U.S. Supreme Court decision: Ronald W. Rosenberger, et al. v. Rector and visitors of the...
Marital satisfaction and conventionalization examined dyadically.
Meditation and psychosocial adaptation: An exploratory study.
Inventoried and observed stress in parent-child interactions.
Body esteem, eating attitudes, and gender-role orientation in three age groups of children.
Validation of selected MMPI-2 basic and content scales.
Denial and self-denigration in the draw-a-person profiles of alcoholics.
Self-referencing, quality of argument, and persuasion.
The Verzuiling puzzle: Understanding Dutch intergroup relations.
The development of risk-taking in children.
Factor analysis of MMPI-2 basic scales among college students.
Expressed and suppressed anger and health problems among transit workers.
Recipient need and efficacious caring as moderators of helpers' reactions to rejection and...
Guilt, guilt-evoking events, depression, and eating disorders.
Media use and political commitment: The 1992 U.S. presidential election.
Interpersonal variables affecting the attributions of defensiveness.
Interpersonal determinants of attitude change following counterattitudinal behavior.
Identifying the ideal mate: More evidence for male-female convergence.
Trees and Volcanoes Cause Smog!
Physician-assisted Suicide.
DEADLY RELICS. (cover story)
The Freedom of Susan Smith. (cover story)
Birth of a Nation in cyberspace.
The Sexist Circuits of English.
Black Holes.
Formal causation and the explanation of intentionality in Descartes.
The impact of dementia on the sufferer and available treatment interventions: An overview.
Do homosexuals teachers pose a risk to pupils?
Traditional ideology as an inhibitor of sexual behavior.
The relationship between age and gender in workers' attitudes toward sexual harassment.
After-class versus in-class data collection: Validity issues.
Structure and validity of the attributional style questionnaire: A cross-sample comparison.
Depression in Parkinson's disease.
Attitudes toward health risks and sunbathing behavior.
Comparison of PhD programs in clinical and counseling psychology.
A multidimensional approach to the study of the structure of coping with stress.
Stress resilience, locus of control, and religion in children of Holocaust victims.
College students' judgments and perceptions of persons with AIDS from different risk groups.
Risk behaviors, self-efficacy, and AIDS prevention among adolescents.
Gender schema and gender role discrepancy as correlates of body image.
The value of children to Hong Kong Chinese parents.
High-tech fattens the bottom line.
Orbiting eye will see where crops need help.
Precision breeding makes better corn--faster.
Making plants hormone-deaf.
African swine fever poses risk to U.S. hogs.
Searching for parasitic `roots'.
Mutant corn has low phytic acid.
Keeping 'em off the farm.
Foreign genes for domestic cottons.
Sugarcane for cooler climes.
IPM targets grasshoppers.
Arboretum leads low-chemical landscape movement.
Red dye, updated traps.
New American elms restore stately trees.
Trash of cash commodity? It's all in the blend.
Geneplay combats cucumber mosaic virus.
Cracking the hard cases.
Fighting back at biting flies.
Buzzing across the border.
A high-tech mosquito barrier.
Reducing airborne dust particles.
One team, one product--many uses.
ARS, companies team up to boost rural economies.
Plant pigments.
Special legumes may be an unopened medicine chest.
Gas 'n' go grapefruit.
Improving ethanol yield from corn.
Listening to insects.
Full circle--and then some.
Race and Gender in the U.S. Military.
Gender integration in Armed Forces: Recent policy developments in the United Kingdom.
The Use of Force: Israeli Public Opinion on Military Options.
Determinants of Soldier Support for Operation Uphold Democracy.
The Coup d'Etat in The Gambia, 1994: The End of the First Republic.
The Civil-Military Problematique: Huntingdon, Janowitz, and the Question of Civilian Control.
Numbers or Networks: Social Constructions of Technology and Organizational Dilemmas in IDF Modernization.
Political Violence and Time in Power.
The Changing Pattern of Military Takeovers in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Investment or Overkill: Should Military Child Development Centers Be Accredited?
The Theory of Concordance in Civil/Military Relations: A Commentary.
Concordance Theory: A Response to Recent Criticism.
Named Military Operations: U.S. Military Operations from January 1989 to December 1993.
Year end review of recycling.
Wood residuals find big uses in small pieces.
Recycled wood and plastic composites find markets.
Developing biosolids compost specifications.
The grocer-farmer composting connection.
On the road to a biosolids composting plant.
Compost teas in agriculture.
Steady climb for biosolids composting.
Turning a mining operation into compost production.
Entrepreneurs surf the waste stream.
Sorting C&D into wood products.
MSW composting in the United States.
Tackling organics at the Summer Games.
Plain talk about 120,000 tons a year.
Northumberland, Ontario launches wet/dry program.
Investigations into liquid compost extracts.
When a hauler invests in organic diversion.
Anaerobic digestion for MSW and industrial wastewater.
Pushing the scrap tire envelope.
Composting cost-effective in landfill reclamation.
Innovations in compost marketing.
Recovering hard to handle waste streams.
Four stream residential collection in Holland.
Commercial and residential organics plot.
Composting animal manure with municipal yard trimmings.
Checking out the pad.
Taking on the construction waste stream.
Biosolids cut fertilizer costs by $200 an acre.
Wetlands treatment: Getting close to nature.
Treating industrial and municipal sewage, naturally.
Recycling makes an impact at the Olympic Games.
Filling the gaps with dropoff recycling.
How much does it cost to compost yard trimmings?
The business of vermicomposting.
Bouncing back from a public nuisance setback.
Composting commercial organics at a county landfill.
Mixing ratios in biosolids composting.
Protecting workers at composting facilities.
Bioaerosols at a Canadian composting facility.
Traveling across the treetops.
Research update I.
Research update II.
Evolution of aquatic angiosperm reproductive systems. (cover story)
Organelle division and cytoplasmic inheritance.
Two decades of carbon flux from forests of the Pacific Northwest.
Integrated conservation and development projects.
Decoding `coding'--information and DNA.
Nestling cuckoos to vaccination--a commemoration of Edward Jenner.
Curbing undesirable invaders.
Saving whales contentiously.
Invasion of North American forests by European phytophagous insects. (cover story)
Predation and population cycles of small mammals.
Ethics and science in natural resource agencies.
The pressures of organizations and the responsibilities of university professors.
An assessment of environmental knowledge and attitudes...
The development of an environmental values short form.
Farmers' attitudes and behavior toward sustainable...
Reflective practice: A case study of professional development for environmental education.
An assessment of 4th-, 8th, and 11th-grade students' environmental science knowledge related to...
A national survey of high school students' environmental knowledge.
Incorporating ecotourist needs data into the interpretive planning process.
Knowledge, affect, and the environment: 15 years of research (1979-1993).
Don't know responses in environmental surveys.
Public perception of strategies for increasing participation in recycling programs.
Predictors of environmental critical thinking: A study of Mexican children.
Environmental education programs for preschool children.
EE teacher inservice education: The need for new perspectives.
Toward a preventive environmental education curriculum: The Washington State University experience.
Teaching and learning in environmental education: Developing environmental conceptions.
Wisconsin EE mandates: The bad news and the good news.
Environmental education and the education literature.
Regions at risk. (cover story)
Tracking toxics.
Drawing the line.
Partnerships to reduce greenhouse emissions in the Baltic.
Environmental implications of economic policies.
Norilsk Nickel. (cover story)
What future for saline lakes?
PROTECTING PEOPLES' BIO.
Controversy over Yellowstone's Biological Resources.
A DOMESTIC DISPUTE.
Growing more food, doing less damage.
What price prawn? Shrimp aquaculture's impact in Asia.
Accounting for progress: Indicators for sustainable development.
Beyond soil conservation.
Technology-migratable ASIC library design.
Design methodology for IBM ASIC products.
Design planning for high-performance ASICs.
Serial storage architecture.
A fast, highly reliable data compression chip and algorithm for storage systems.
The past and present roles of computer-aided engineering in DASD design.
Architectural verification of advanced storage controllers.
Charge-metering sampling circuits and their applications.
Thin-film media--current and future technology.
Computer-aided 3D tolerance analysis of disk drives.
Rewritable optical disk drive technology.
The floating-point unit of the PowerPC 603e microprocessor.
Auditors' Decision-Aided Probability Assessments: An Analysis of the Effects of List Length and Response Format.
An Empirical Analysis of the Accounting Information Systems Course.
An Architecture for Future Computer-Based Accounting Systems: Generating Formula Accounting Journal Entries from TPS Databases Using the Resources and Exchange Events Accounting Model.
User Participation in Defining System Interface Requirements: An Issue of Procedural Justice.
Developing an Event-Based Business Solution: The Case of IBM's National Employee Disbursement System.
History of a systematics odyssey: The marine flora and fauna of the Eastern United States.
Recent trends in the catch of undersized swordfish by the U.S. Pelagic Longline Fishery.
The crustacean and molluscan fisheries of Honduras.
History of oystering in the United States and Canada, featuring the eight greatest oyster...
New products.
A global network for plant design.
Reviewing designs in cyberspace.
Composite car structures pass the crash test. (cover story)
Gas pipelines go electric.
Monitoring gas pipelines.
Scrubbing away pollution.
Thread geometry and fastener performance.
The resource file.
New products.
Virtual engineering on the right track.
A re-engineered strike fighter takes off.
Engineering systems face the future.
Job shops retool.
CFD software improves pump design.
Designing safer flywheels.
Shedding light on vibration.
The 1995-96 ASME fellows.
New products.
Can the National Optical Observatories survive?
A thousand points of light.
Wormholes and hyper-drives.
The world of radio astronomy.
In the wink of a star.
Amateur astronomers' excellent adventures.
Science in the bilingual classroom--Ciencia en la clase bilingue.
A quantum broom sweeps clean.
Astronomy learning and student thinking.
The day after.
Fourteen billion years young.
The world of radio astronomy.
When planetaries meet planets.
Have observatory, will travel.
Relativity in the palm of your hand.
The shapes of things to come.
The world of radio astronomy.
Promethean ice.
Comets and the public.
Comets now and then.
The keeper of the list.
A blindman's buff through astronomy.
Does mind matter?
The mother of all fireworks.
Teaching the real message of astronomy.
The world of radio astronomy part 4.
A Kenya sketchbook.
War of the worldviews.
Raging dove.
The settlement.
The return of il lupo.
Almost atoll.
A Ruthenian Christmas.
Nobel prize in physics to Lee, Osheroff and Richardson for...
Nobel Chemistry prize goes to Curl, Kroto and Smalley for...
The pool-table analogy with axion physics.
Topological ideas and fluid mechanics.
The introductory calculus-based physics textbook.
New products.
Confidence is growing in tropospheric OH measurements.
Researchers glance at magnetic surfaces with synchrotron...
Trinity at Dubna.
Detecting the Soviet bomb: Joe-1 in a rain barrel.
(1) The American effort.
(2) Beginnings of the Soviet H-bomb program.
From the ordinary to the extraordinary.
Program descriptions.
Western fun night party.
The allure of Jaisalmer.
Camera clubs, judges and other things, a personal view.
Making panoramas.
1996 PSA International Conference in Tucson.
A Blue Bosom Boy.
Howdy pardner.
Photographer's paradise.
Abstract expressions in nature.
Nature photography and rehabilitation.
More effective nature with close-up flash.
Photojournalism.
Capturing the moment of peak action in sports.
Tucson area conference tours.
Tina Modotti.
What's the score?
Photo travel.
Pictorial print.
Monochrome prints.
On my mind...
Prominent world photography groups.
Extending the frontiers of photographic vision.
The 1996 chapters showcase.
Does your audience watch your show?
SCADA system using packet radios helps to lower Cincinnati's telemetry costs.
On-the-job training: Harder than it looks.
Controlling hydrogen sulfide emissions.
Sludge management savings found among the reeds.
New techniques provide solutions to data communication dilemmas in water districts.
Understanding spiders and the role they play in jaw couplings.
Aerator and reservoir baffling solve vinyl chloride, coliform problems.
Technology focus.
Protecting water storage tanks in an era of environmental...
Bypass system accomplished by microtunneling at Santa Cruz.
Unknown exposures are potential liabilities for wastewater...
Engineering parameters in the design of evapotranspiration...
Best professional judgement: A synthesis of environmental...
Media-bed filtration: Painstaking analysis of situation...
Automating wastewater flows for billing: Philly's success...
Technology focus.
Determining the economical optimum life of residential water meters.
New energy partnership: Reusing wastewater for cooling at Boeing. (cover story)
Lightning and surge protection for electronic systems in water and wastewater treatment...
A new model for general education associate's degree programs: Developing and teaching a core...
A survey of transfer students at four-year institutions serving a California community college.
The effective community college academic administrator: Necessary competencies and attitudes.
Reconciling educational leadership and the learning organization.
The assessment of community college economic impact on the local community or state.
African American community college presidents.
Leadership training initiatives for community college administrators: A focused synthesis of the...
In search of community: Faculty assessment of its presence at three institutions.
Observations on community college leadership.
A predictive model of retention rate at regional two-year colleges.
Identification with academics and academic success among community college students.
ERIC Review--Blending the voices: Differing perspectives on the community college.
Becoming an expert: The college experiences of welfare-to-work participants.
Comparison of community college transfer students and native students in an upper level...
Variables affecting the decision to withdraw from liberal arts and science courses.
Changing the channel: Community colleges in the information age.
ERIC review--the economic returns of a community college education.
Education as play for mortal stakes.
It's how you play the game.
Gaming serves as a model for improving learning. (cover story)
Education and assessment: How do we measure a game?
Achievement motivation and college satisfaction in...
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: Mountain or a...
Cooperative learning: An investigation of the knowledge...
Use of videotapes of exemplary mathematics teaching for...
The impact of recycling education on the knowledge, attitudes...
Influence of ten leading educators on American education.
The role of reinforcement in self-monitoring.
Examining the validity structure of qualitative research.
Writing movement/dancing words: A collaborative pedagogy.
To achieve school reform education leaders must focus on...
Determining the negative effect of teacher attendance on...
Notes on the process of benchmarking in education.
Intercultural communication within multicultural schools:...
The laws of ignorance designed to keep slaves...
Examining the impact of the Chinese educational system.
Children and poverty: How American higher education must...
A demographic profile of U.S. middle school foreign language...
A call for strength: How to manage students for a more...
Boredom proneness in African-American college students:...
Students' positive reliance on writing as a process to learn first...
Faculty adoption of educational technologies in higher learning.
Progressive testing in graduate research methods courses.
Memorization of poetry: Good or bad?
Teaching and promotion among Texas biologists.
Student preferences for various teaching styles.
Social science in the elementary school in teacher education.
Cooperative learning: Perceptions of preservice teachers.
Pedagogy in teaching at the university.
Bruner's three forms of representation revisited: Action,...
Learning needs of African-American, Caucasian, and Hispanic...
Determinants of physical activity behavior in African-American...
Why students can't remember: The problem of forgetting.
Achievement motivation, flow and irrational beliefs in...
Drama: A teaching tool for culturally diverse children...
Student preferences of teacher discipline styles.
Preparing new teachers to effectively communicate with...
A review of cooperative learning: An alternative to...
Social studies and the middle school student.
A new metaphor: Individuals as the sculptors.
Behaviors perceived as facilitating or inhibiting the...
Kentucky performance assessment of mathematics: Do the...
The use of interactive questioning strategies with...
Parent and teacher views of gifted children's social abilities.
Debunking the myth of the `highly significant' result: Effect sizes in gifted education research.
Word class: A way to modify spelling instruction for gifted learners.
Georgia's journey toward multiple-criteria identification of gifted students.
Multiple criteria: The mandate and the challenge.
Multiple criteria from a parent's perspective or we all want the best for our children.
Helping gifted students develop metacognitive awareness.
Excellence as a standard for all education.
Creating inclusive environments for African American children and youth with gifts and talents.
The emotional adjustment of gifted adolescents: A view of global functioning.
Self-actualizing men and women--a comparison study.
Coping or counseling: Families of intellectually gifted students.
Daily experiences and adjustment of gifted low-income urban children at home and school.
Weapon-carrying and youth violence.
Adolescent same-sex and opposite sex best friend interactions.
Project support: Engaging children and families in the...
Instruments to measure social support and related constructs...
Domain-specific gender comparisons in identity development among...
Nuances before dinner: Exploring the relationship between peer...
Adolescent male athletes: Body image, diet, and exercise.
The influence of fashion magazines on the body image satisfaction...
Weight, weight-related aspects of body image, and depression...
Treating powerless minorities through an ecosystem approach.
Co-victimization among African-American adolescents.
Adolescent mothers' self-esteem and role identity and their...
Street youth, their peer group affiliation and differences...
Impact of demographics, sexual history, and psychological functioning on the acquisition of STDs...
Condom and other contraceptive use among a random sample of female adolescents: A snapshot in time.
Sexually transmitted disease prevention: Adolescents' perceptions of possible side effects.
Romanticism and self-esteem among teen mothers.
Ethnicity, drug user status and academic performance.
Stress and illness in adolescence: Issues of race and gender.
The neurological basis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Adolescent body mass indices and self-perception.
Mentors: Beacons of hope.
Adapting the MMPI for use in assessing late adolescents in Trinidad and Tobago.
Transitions in family structure and adolescent well-being.
Adolescent self-concept among Han, Mongolian, and Korean Chinese.
Adolescents at risk: Causes of youth suicide in New Zealand.
The influence of familial factors on anxiety and depression in childhood and early adolescence.
Physical punishment and signs of mental distress in normal adolescents.
Self-concept and body image of Turkish high school male athletes and nonathletes.
Adolescents' perceptions of family responsibility-taking.
Adolescent psychiatric patients' interactions with their mothers.
Enhancing ethical decision making in sexuality and AIDS education.
ON ETHNOGRAPHIC AUTHORITY AND THE TOURIST TRADE: ANTHROPOLOGY IN THE HOUSE OF MIRRORS.
LOST TRIBES: INDIGENOUS PEOPLE AND THE SOCIAL IMAGINARY.
CONSUMING IMAGES: REPRESENTAIONS OF CANNIBALISM ON THE AMOZONIAN FRONTIER.
THE CULTURAL CITIZEN: NEGATIONS OF RACE AND LANGUAGE IN THE MAKING OF MARTINIQUAIS.
BEREAVEMENT, COMMEMORATION, AND COLLECTIVE IDENTITY IN CONTEMPORARY ISRAELI SOCIETY.
RUMORS AND POLITICS IN HAITI.
MASS GRAVES, STAGNATING IDENTIFICATION, AND VIOLENCE: A CASE STUDY IN THE LOCAL SOURCES OF "THE WAR" IN BOSNIA HERCEGOVINA.
READ ALL ABOUT IT: THE PRESS AND THE RISE OF NATIONAL CONSCIOUSNESS IN EARLY TWENTIETH-CENTURY DUTCH EAST INDIES SOCIETY.
WHY WE RETURN TO PAPUA NEW GUINEA.
THE GHOST IN THE MACHINE: AGENCY IN "POSTSTRUCTURAL" CRITIQUES OF DEVELOPMENT.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
MATERIALIZATIONS OF MEMORY: THE SUBSTANCE OF REMEMBERING AND FORGETTING: INTRODUCTION.
A regulatory placebo? or, the strange case of Dr. Kaufman...
The informal economy in Latin America.
Jobs creation and government policy.
A survey of the impact of budget rules on state taxation, spending, and debt.
Medicare's origin: The economics and politics of dependency.
The market value of family values.
TOXICITY OF A GOURMET BANQUET.
CRIME VICTIMIZATION AMONG INJECTION DRUG USERS.
STABILITY OF PSYCHIATRIC SYMPTOMS AMONG MENTALLY ILL CHEMICAL ABUSERS IN LONG-TERM RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT PROGRAMS.
PRESCRIPTION FRAUD: CHARACTERISTICS, CONSEQUENCES, AND INFLUENCES.
DATA BASE OF STUDIES ON PRENATAL COCAINE EXPOSURE AND CHILD OUTCOME.
SUBSTANCE USE AND ISSUES OF VIOLENCE AMONG LOW-INCOME, PREGNANT WOMEN: THE CALIFORNIA PERINATAL….
A STUDY OF DRUG-ABUSING AFRICAN-AMERICAN PREGNANT WOMEN.
Political ecology and conflict in Ankarana, Madagascar.
The triumph of conjugality: Structural transformation of family relations in a Chinese village.
Sickness, healing, and religious vocation: Alternative choices at a Theravada Buddhist nunnery.
Class and ethnicity in Mexico: Somatic and racial considerations.
Consuming rural Japan: The marketing of tradition and nostalgia in the Japanese travel industry.
Coping with crisis: Costa Rican households and the international coffee market.
Introduction: Cyberspace and geographical space.
The words of cyberspace.
Cyberspace and virtual places.
The emerging geographies of virtual worlds.
Gentile impressions of Salt Lake City, Utah, 1849-1870[*].
Soil conservation, political ecology, and technological change on Saint Vincent[*].
Japanese precious wood and the paradoxes of added value[*].
Pork palaces on the panhandle[*].
Medjugorje: Finding peace at the heart of conflict.
Flood disturbance and the distribution of riparian species diversity(*).
The spiny-lobster fishery in Cuba(*).
The magnetism of Miami: Segmented paths in Cuban migration(*).
Ethnic residential segregation in Belfast, Northern Ireland, 1971-1991(*).
The United Arab Emirates.
The spatial concentration of affluence in the United States.
CULTURALLY SPECIFIC HEALTH CARE MODEL FOR ENSURING HEALTH CARE USE BY RURAL, ETHNICALLY DIVERSE FAMILIES AFFECTED BY HIV/AIDS.
CONNECTING GROUP MEMBERS THROUGH TELEPHONE AND COMPUTER GROUPS.
MOTHERS' SATISFACTION WITH MEDICAL CARE: Perceptions of Racism, Family Stress, and Medical Outcomes in Children with Diabetes.
RESILIENCE IN ADULT CHILDREN OF ALCOHOLICS: A Nonpathological Approach to Social Work Practice.
EDUCATING STUDENTS FOR A CHANGING HEALTH ENVIRONMENT: An Examination of Health Care Practice Course Content.
UNIVERSAL HEALTH CARE COVERAGE IN THE UNITED STATES: Barriers, Prospects, and Implications.
America's Most Cruel Xenophobia.
The benefits of homogenous grouping in physical education.
Culturally responsive teaching in physical education.
An investigation of the relationships between family activity habits and children's fitness levels.
Body image dissatisfaction and moderate diet manipulation: Factors related to suicide behavior.
Characteristics of physical education teacher educators.
Respect: The missing component of modern athletic competition.
Humor in education.
The effects of interactive videotape instruction on knowledge, performance, and assessment of...
Integrating qualitative analysis of movement in the university physical education curriculum.
From one image to a sharper one!
Rural fourth graders' perceptions of physical fitness and fitness testing.
The effect of critical cues on overhand throwing efficiency of elementary school children.
Parent-coach understanding: Another look.
Integrating physical and health education into one course: Is it working in Montana?
Investigating the post-lesson dialogue of cooperating and student teachers.
Using technology in preservice teacher supervision.
Perceived barriers to involvement in professional associations: Views of physical educators in...
Learning style preferences of physical education majors.
The role of the coach with eating disordered athletes: Recognition, referral, and recommendations.
What we have learned through collaboration: A summary report from a National Teacher Education...
Mentoring: Perspectives of physical education graduate students from diverse cultural backgrounds.
Student teachers' conceptions of the teaching-learning process: Case studies of recruits with...
What grading tells us about college physical education.
Are oversight physical educators at a disadvantage in the labor market? A random survey of...
World population implosion?
The crisis in scholarly publishing.
Fathers and welfare reform.
The failure of drug education.
In pursuit of criminal justice.
Public housing as a `poorhouse'.
School choice builds community.
Ritalin: Miracle drug or cop-out?
On patriotism.
How to mend affirmative action.
Art without beauty.
The new museology.
Moist eyes--from Rousseau to Clinton.
IQ and economic success.
The prescience of Myrdal.
The culture of secrecy.
Replacing the nursing home.
A conservative case for regulation.
Computers: Good for education?
Equality, growth, and the myopic society.
Personal space preference among adolescents with and without visual disabilities.
Some knowledge areas in blindness rehabilitation.
Springboard.
Corner to corner: How can deaf-blind travelers solicit aid effectively?
The possibility of health insurance coverage of vision-related rehabilitation services.
Positive experiences with dogs: An important addition to the curriculum for blind and visually...
Springboard.
Impact of low vision on orientation: An exploratory study.
Critical factors in assessment of students with visual impairments.
Springboard.
The effect of hand position on detection distance for object and surface preview when using the...
Spatial organization in blind children.
A Meta-Analytic Review of Findings from National Samples on Psychological Correlates of Child Sexual Abuse.
Moral Dilemmas, Moral Reasoning, and Genital Herpes.
Anger Coping Styles and Perceived Social Support.
Job Satisfaction and Intent to Leave.
Ethnolinguistic Vitality Under a New Political Dispensation in South Africa.
The Influence of Societal Factors on Female Body Image.
Lay Explanations for Poverty in Turkey and Their Determinants.
Tolerance for Concerts in a Public Place.
Gender as a Determinant of Work Values Among University Students in Israel.
Social Strategies and Loneliness.
Social Support, Reciprocity, and Well-Being.
Individualism, Collectivism, and Decision Styles of Managers in Kuwait.
Hindi Translation of the Gray-Wilson Personality Questionnaire: A Cross-Cultural Replication of Sex Differences.
Value Congruence in Leader-Member Exchange.
Equity Sensitivity and Double Demotivation.
Computational Technologies and Images of the Self.
Technology and Culture.
Three Laboratories.
Science and Technology: Biology and Biotechnology.
Exaggerated Hopes and Baseless Fears.
Constitutional Law and New Technology.
Technology and Philosophy.
Literature and Technology: Nature's "Lawful Offspring in Man's Art"
The Relationship between Transience and Current Life Situation in the Homeless Service-Using Population. (cover story)
Ideology and Social Work Practice in Substance Abuse Settings.
The Index of Drug Involvement: A Partial Validation. (cover story)
Elizabeth Ross Haynes: An African American Reformer of Womanist Consciousness, 1908-1940.
Site-Based Services for Residents of Single-Room Occupancy Hotels.
Immigrant Policy: Issues for Social Work Practice.
Sociopolitical Antecedents to Stonewall: Analysis of the Origins of the Gay Rights Movement in the United States.
Public Schools and the Revitalization of Impoverished Communities: School-Linked, Family Resource Centers.
Asset Building as a Community Revitalization Strategy.
Implementing Comprehensive Community Development: Possibilities and Limitations.
Role of Latina-Owned Beauty Parlors in a Latino Community.
The Little Village Project: A Community Approach to the Gang Problem.
Building Community: Principles for Social Work Practice in Housing Settings.
Youths and Communities: Toward Comprehensive Strategies for Youth Development.
Assessing the Impact of Community Violence on Children and Youths.
Countering Urban Disinvestment through Community-Building Initiatives.
Nonprofit Organizations and Innovation: A Model of Neighborhood-Based Collaboration to Prevent Child Maltreatment.
Strengthening Neighborhoods by Developing Community Networks.
Participants' attitudes about the integration of...
The physical costs and psychosocial benefits of travel aids...
Techniques to collect and analyze the cognitive map...
Research to improve vocational rehabilitation: Employment...
A comparative study of spelling performance of sighted...
Play and concept development in infants and young children...
Use of remote infrared signage in a complex transit station...
Changes in the situation of blind persons in the colony...
The impact of social work intervention on the experience...
Behaviors of preschoolers with visual impairments in...
Labeling children who are visually impaired `disadvantaged.'
Teachers' perspectives on selecting literacy media for...
Standardized ability testing for vocational rehabilitation...
ESL for students with visual impairments.
A bilingual braille book-printing system in Kuwait.
Progression of eye disorders in a nursing home.
People with Usher syndrome, Type II: Issues and adaptations.
Evaluation of a prototype Talking Directory Display System...
An analysis of drop-off detection with the long cane.
Statistics on visual impairment in older persons,...
Specialized Schools Still In Jeopardy.
Random Access.
A Tactile Prehistoric Cave Installation by Visually Impaired and Sighted Artists.
The role of education and rehabilitation specialists...
The use of traffic sounds to make street crossings...
Attitudes of visually impaired persons toward the use...
Mother's interpretations of the behavior of their infants...
Increasing a functional skill for an adolescent with...
Speed, accuracy, and comprehension of adolescent braille...
The education of blind and visually impaired children...
Prevalence and employment of people in the United States...
Windows 95 Access for Blind or Visually Impaired Persons: An Overview.
Candyland.
Outside looking in.
The social science area studies controversy from the continental African standpoint.
For African studies, race still matters.
Distant beacons and immediate steps: Area studies, international studies, and the disciplines in...
The internationalization of African studies: A view from the SSRC.
Funding African studies in the twenty-first century.
Local/global linkages and the future of African studies.
The remaking of African studies.
African studies at the fin de siecle: Is it really the fin?
The perpetual solitudes and crises of African studies in the United States.
No lamps were lit for them: Angel Island and the historiography of Asian American immigration.
`I'm fighting for freedom': Coleman Young, HUAC, and the Detroit African American community.
The transnationalism of the Italian-American left: The Lawrence strike of 1912 and the Italian...
Inbetween peoples: Race nationality and the `new immigrant' working class.
A decade of change: Puerto Rican politics in Hartford, Connecticut, 1969-1979.
The immigrant letter between positivism and populism: The uses of immigrant personal...
Internationalizing `the American dilemma': The Civil Rights Congress and the 1951 genocide...
Between alienation and ethnicity: The evolution of Mexican-American Catholicism in San Antonio...
Fear and contempt: A European concept of property.
Native American life stories and 'authorship': Legal and ethical issues.
Collaboration and the complex world of literary rights.
From appropriation to subversion: Aboriginal cultural production in the age of postmodernism.
Imagination, conversation, and trickster discourse: Negotiating an approach to Native American Literary Culture.
Why native literature?
Generic power plays in Mourning Dove's Co-ge-we-a.
Hidden transcripts in the Chippewa Treaty Rights struggle: A twice told story race, resistance, and the politics of power.
Generative adversity: Shapeshifting Pauline/Leopolda in Tracks and Love Medicine.
Storytellers And Their Listener-Readers In Silko's 'Storytelling' and 'Storyteller'.
Looking for Mr.Bellow.
The writer's credo.
An homage to Saul Bellow.
In praise of Saul's soul.
The hero's last ordeal.
American agricultural and rural history.
Integrating American studies with China's intellectual discourse.
From Carter to Clinton: The latest crisis of American liberalism.
The ironies and dilemmas of America's cultural dominance: A transcultural approach.
There's no place like home: `Geographies of the [American] mind' in The Innocents Abroad.
Prospects for American studies in the Arab World: Present and future.
Making business history: An annotated bibliography.
Jacks' ghost: Reappearances of John F. Kennedy in the work of Gore Vidal and Norman Mailer.
Raymond Federman's Double or Nothing: A prolegomena to a postmodern production aesthetics.
Mother and child relationships in the novels of Louise Erdrich.
False heroes: A study of Abd al-Rahman Majid al-Rubay'i's novel al-Washm (The Tattoo).
The Blind River: Self and anxiety in Aziz al-Samawi's poetry.
Iraq's modern Arabic literature in English translation: A preliminary bibliography.
The politics and the poetics of Sa'di Yusuf: The use of the vernacular.
Nazik Al-Mala'ika's poetry and its critical reception in the West.
Studies in human psyche and human behavior under political and social pressure: The recent...
Stirring words: Traditions and subversions in the poetry of Muzaffar Al-Nawwab.
The people's theater of Yusuf al-Ani.
China's dilemma in cross-strait crisis management.
Drawn into the fray: Indonesia's Natuna Islands meet China's...
The politics of marketization: Inequality versus efficiency.
Potential military solutions for the `Taiwan question.'
Party primaries in Taiwan: Continuing appraisal.
Industrial dualism, income, and gender inequality in...
The People's Republic of China and Latin America: From...
China after Deng Xiaoping: Prospects for continuity or change.
China after Deng Xiaoping: Minimal immediate impact.
China after Deng Xiaoping: Positive engagement and...
China after Deng Xiaoping: Some encouraging--and...
The Cost of Combating Global Warming.
Information Intervention.
The Rise of Illiberal Democracy.
Asia's Reemergence.
EMU and International Conflict.
Sanctioning Madness.
Algeria's Long Night.
Puerto Rico's Decolonization.
Is Government Too Political?
Effects of liberalization programs on poverty and inequality: Chile, Mexico, and Peru.
Shady business: Corruption in the Brazilian army before 1954.
The composition and distribution of ethnic groups in Belize: Immigration and emigration patterns,...
Taming capitalism: The evolution of the indigenous peasant economy in Northern Ecuador.
Sources on the history of Favelas in Rio De Janeiro.
A clash of paradigms: Recent interpretations of Brazilian development.
Recent contributions on the socioeconomic history of modern Argentina.
Race, resistance, and regionalism: Perspectives from Brazil and Spanish America.
Text and context in the interpretation of Aztec culture and society.
Diverse approaches to nineteenth-century Mexican history.
New currents in Puerto Rican history: Legacy, continuity, and challenges of the `nueva historia.'
Democratization in Latin America.
The relationship between multicultural and democratic...
What I hope a high school graduate knows about George...
George Washington: A hero for American students?
Washington: `...By ability, politeness, and attention.'
The National History Standards and George Washington.
Minimum State Standards for Secondary Social Studies...
The world as a multilevel mosaic: Understanding regions.
FDR? `He was a president' and `I can't remember back then.'
Factlore, fakelore, or folklore: Sorting through folk...
Statewide social studies performance assessment: Threat or treat?
Portfolio assessment in middle-school and high-school...
Issues related to teaching generalizations in elementary...
Treasures from the past: Using archaeology in...
Indonesian social studies education: A critical analysis.
It's more than teaching history...
The challenges of teaching social studies methods to...
Out of the laboratory: Teaching about the history and nature...
Scaffolding student's reading of history.
Holocaust education: Legislation, practices, and literature...
Teaching about democratization in the high-school...
Conservation of resources and the common pool problem.
ECON12 and the new social studies: Love's labor lost?
Literature and history--a focus on the era of the great...
Time capsules: Tools for the classroom historian.
Narcissism and the moral sense: Moral education in the...
Why? Notes from the ASA.
Edo Art, dynastic myth, and intellectual aporia.
Images of Benin at the Pitt Rivers Museum.
The art of fasting: Benin's Ague Ceremony.
Contemporary art and artists in Benin City.
Baule.
Studies of Benin art and material culture, 1897-1997.
Aesthetics and evolution: Benin art in Europe.
Early images from Benin at the National Museum of African...
Casting identities in contemporary Benin City.
Felix von Luschan and early German-language Benin studies.
Continuity and change: The ivories of Ovonramwen and Eweka...
Cast, Miscast.
The Life and Art of Stephen Kappata.
Akinjobi of Oke-Odan.
Bogolanfini in Bamako.
Zerihun Yetmgeta.
Cleveland Museum of Art.
Skirting the issue: Manet's portrait of Baudelaire's Mistress, Reclining.
Gift exchange and art collecting: Padre Sebastiano Resta's drawing albums.
Saint Eudokia and the imperial household of Leo VI.
Procopius and the imperial panels of S. Vitale.
`Heroes' and `whores': The politics of gender in Weimar antiwar imagery.
The arts and the scattered self: Reflections in the age of cyberspace.
Four more years--so what?
Music in America's schools: A plan for action.
Technological segregation: A peek through the looking...
Perennial promises and pitfalls in arts education reform.
Teaching art in elementary schools: Shared responsibilities...
Universal access for the univeral language.
Implications of the Southeastern College Art Conference's...
From bureaucratic control to building human capital: The...
Dwelling with music.
Once upon a time there was a minister: An unfinished story about reform in Norwegian arts education.
Integration, creativity, or communication? Paradigm shifts and continuity in Swedish art education.
Aims and methods in Danish preschool music education.
Assessing aesthetic education: Measuring the ability to `ward off chaos'.
Adverbial expressions signifying bodily movements and postures in Hispano-romance.
What does Luciana want? Reclaiming the female consciousness in Cortazar's `Cambio de Luces'.
Rosario Ferre en el espejo: Defiance and inversions.
From romantic irony to romantic grotesque: Mariano Jose de Larra's and Rosalia de Castro's ...
Myth, desire, and the play of inversion: The fourteenth eclogue of Juan del Encina.
The frontier ballad and Spanish golden age historiography: Recontextualizing the guerras civiles...
Fuente Ovejuna on the rack: Interrogation of a carnivalesque theatre of terror.
The revolution that wasn't: Sexual and political decay in Marse's Ultimas Tardes con Teresa.
MENC today.
Composition in the choral rehearsal.
Menc today.
Alternatives to traditional notation.
Play-party games in the modern classroom.
Producing your own concert recordings.
The ideas of Kodaly in America.
MENC today.
Teaching ensembles to compose and improvise.
Using the Internet for professional development.
Music education in China.
MENC's ninetieth anniversary.
Part singing revisited.
Orff-Schulwerk an integrated foundation.
MENC today.
Senior adult bands music's New Horizon.
Lessons from The Nightingale.
Exercising the musical imagination.
Music education in the twenty-first century.
Menc today.
Using case studies in the methods classroom.
Tips and guidelines for building a Web site.
Music appreciation class.
A sound-to-symbol approach to learning music.
Where we stand.
Wound culture: Trauma in the pathological public sphere.
Visual pleasure in 1959.
Robert Morris and John Cage: Reconstructing a dialogue.
Letters to John Cage.
John Cage and the architecture of silence.
Boris Arvatov's socialist objects.
Everyday life and the culture of the thing. (Toward the formulation of the question).
Islendingabok and myth.
The Swedish democracy project.
Society for the Advancement of Scandinavian Study.
New light on the Bardach diary.
The roaring twenties of Elmer Diktonius.
EU or Not EU?
The sacrifices of Ellen Einan.
Ibsen and the Name-of-the-Father.
Make me a match.
Traditional Norwegian social democracy and the rejection of the EU.
Diderot's tableaux, Greek tragic form, and Gengangere.
An attempt to remove Ibsen from antiquity to modernity.
Tracking out.
Europe or bust?
Strinberg, Peter Szondi, and the origins of modern (tragic) drama.
Ways of personifying.
`Strange things I have in head, that will to hand': Echoes of sound and sense in Macbeth.
`Terrible simplicity': Emerson's metaleptic style.
Family systems psychotherapy, literary character, and literature: An introduction.
`Only connecting' with the family: Class, culture, and narrative therapy in E.M. Forster's...
`Anaconda love': Parental enmeshment in Toni Morrison's Song of Solomon.
Anne Tyler's Dinner at the Homesick Restaurant: A critical feast.
The family dynamics of the reception of art.
Tzvetan Todorov: An anglo-French checklist to 1995.
A catalogue of rhetorical and other literary terms from American literature and oratory[*].
Toward a radical feminist stage rhetoric in the short plays of Lidia Falcon.
Pascal in the bathtub: Parodying the Pensees.
`The Other Woman': Reading a body of difference in Balzac's La fille aux yeux d'or.
Textual suicide in Mirbeau's Le Calvaire.
INSCRIBING THE SPACE OF FEMALE IDENTITY IN CARMEN MARTIN GAITE'S ENTRE VISILLOS.
REPRESENTATION AND ABSENCE: PARADOXICAL STRUCTURE IN POSTMODERN TEXTS.
PONGE AND MANET: READING THE URBAN THROUGH THE PAINTER'S LENS IN LE PARTI PRIS DES CHOSES.
CLAUDINE'S PEERS: SOCIAL AND HISTORICAL EXPECTATIONS FOR COLETTE'S FIRST HEROINE.
VIOLENT SILENCE AND VIOLENT DISCOURSE IN "LOS POCILLOS"
SHAND'S LAST (GRAND) STAND?
Supreme spree.
No place to hide. (cover story)
Main street decisions.
Constructing team spirit.
Who's raising the kids?
Standards for approval of law schools and interpretations.
Rules of procedure for approval of law schools by the American Bar Association.
Nobody's child. (cover story)
Lucas deserved better.
Public relief.
The court conjurer.
Is DOJ above the rules?
Looking the part. (cover story)
These taxing times.
Reality checks.
Changing the venue menu.
Continuing the commitment.
Worthy of mention.
Business is booming.
Workplace bias to the fore.
The last word debate.
Northern composure.
Running for coverage.
Deleting cybercrooks.
Playing the marketing game.
Facing the final exit. (cover story)
Say the right thing.
Changing times, changing rules.
Applying the brakes to punitives.
Introduction and history of the Canada-U.S. Law Institute.
Judging NAFTA.
NAFTA's economic effects: Plus or minus?--a Canadian perspective.
The Mexican economic recovery.
Seeing NAFTA through three lenses.
NAFTA--the broad strokes: A Canadian lawyer's perspective.
NAFTA: Its legal effects--the broad strokes: A Mexican perspective.
Discussion after the speeches of Ewell Murphy, Lawrence Herman, and Beatrice Prati.
NAFTA vis a vis the E.U.--similarities and differences and their effects on member countries.
Discussion after the speech of William Graham.
Dispute resolution under NAFTA: A U.S. perspective.
Dispute resolution under NAFTA: A Canadian perspective.
Discussion after the speeches of Robert Cassidy and Simon Potter.
The cultural industries exemption from NAFTA--its parameters.
Canadian cultural industries exemption from NAFTA--its parameters.
The cultural industries exemption from NAFTA: Another Canadian perspective.
Discussion after the speeches of John Ragosta and Jennifer Fong.
Implications of NAFTA's extension to Chile and other countries--a U.S. view.
Implications of NAFTA's extension to Chile and other countries--a Canadian view.
Sustainable bioprospecting: Using private contracts and international legal principles and...
Candidate conservation agreements under the Endangered Species Act: Prospects and perils of an...
Negotiated rulemaking and combined sewer overflows (CSOs): Consensus saves ossification?
Statehood in South Asia.
Congress decline and party pluralism in India.
Anarchy in Afghanistan.
Uncertain success: The political economy of Indian economic reform.
Whose independence? The social impact of economic reform in India.
Economic liberalization and separatist nationalism: The cases of Sri Lanka and Tibet.
Women, population and sustainable development in South Asia.
Local control versus technocracy: The Bangladesh flood response study.
Refugee protection in South Asia.
Future uncertain: Indian security policy approaches the millennium.
Negotiating the CTBT: India's security concerns and nuclear disarmament.
The CTBT and nuclear disarmament--the U.S. view.
Standards, rules, and social norms.
The judiciary and free markets.
Law and economics should be used for economic questions.
Judges and economics; Normative, positive, and experimental perspectives.
Three proposals to harness private information in contract.
What would Burke think of law and economics?
The market for `law-and' scholarship.
Law and the social sciences.
Class legislation, public choice, and the structural constitution.
The original constitution and its decline: A public choice perspective.
Purchasing political inaction: How regulators use the threat of legal `reform' to extort payoffs.
Does public choice theory justify judicial activism after all?
Recent developments.
Recent developments.
Recent developments.
Limits to economics as a norm for judicial decisions.
Law, science, and law and economics.
Law, economics, and the power of the state.
Externalities everywhere?: Morals and the police power.
Of sex and drugs, and rock 'n' roll: Does law and economics support social regulation?
The autonomy of law in law and economics.
Law is a sometime autonomous discipline.
The rhetorical presidency, presidential authority and...
The presidential candidate, then and now.
Walker Percy's twentieth-century Thomism.
The recovery of the common world.
The uniqueness of the political philosophy of Thomas Aquinas.
Thomas Aquinas as a political thinker.
Presidential character: The example of George Washington.
`By the chains of the Constitution.'
Clinton, Carter, and the policy wonk presidency.
The Senate filibuster.
The hermeneutics of ideological indoctrination.
The deliberative republic and the compound theory of representation in The Federalist.
A glimpse of impossibility.
Havel's postmodern view of man in the cosmos.
Foreign investment in Cuba.
International commitments to keep: Hong Kong beyond 1997.
Racial nationalism and China's external behavior.
Macedonia: Coming in from the cold.
The World Intellectual Property Organization.
The United Nations' `development activities'.
The new Arab cold war.
Ancient hatreds or elite manipulation?
Identity, culture, and historicity.
Self-determination and international recognition policy.
The dilemma of simultaneity.
El Salvador's lessons for future U.S. interventions.
The effects of receiving Holy Communion on health.
Educator-employer partnerships: A tool for improving environmental health education.
The use of enterococcus and coliform in characterizing bathing-beach waters.
Pollution prevention education and training: Getting the job done.
What is the design for the environment?
Clustering effects of lone star ticks in nature: Implications for control.
Taxpayers' attitudes toward local environmental health specialists: Salary levels, educational...
Solid waste management in Guilan Province, Iran.
What is pollution prevention?
Performance management: A case study.
Identification and prevention of microbial risks in foods...
National Environmental Health Association position...
A proactive approach for managing indoor air quality.
1996 - A PETE year in review message from the executive..
Staphylococcal food poisoning from a fundraiser.
Reducing exposure to electromagnetic fields: The effects of low- and high-threat risk messages on...
National Environmental Health Association position on Children's Emvironmental Health.
`Capitol'-izing on a bigger and better AEC.
Learning about local environmental health authorities in the United Kingdom: A month-long...
A public health assessment tool used to analyze the health and safety effects of a major...
Heterotrophic bacteria control in a residential reverse-osmosis drinking-water filter.
Design for the environment publications.
Continuing patterns of metallic-mercury exposure--alert.
Tattletales, culture, and quality of care.
`The horse on the dining room table.'
The World Wide Web: As big as you want to be.
Assessing the connection between information systems and...
Finding the right home care partner.
Patient-focused primary care: A model.
Recruitment of primary healthcare physicians in rural areas.
Communication: The key to reducing malpractice claims.
Stewardship.
Beyond JCAHO: Using competency models to change healthcare...
Patient-provider agreement on guidelines for preparation...
Nursing compensation: A historical review.
Clinical engineers: A vanishing hospital resource.
Faster. Stronger. Private?
Physician-assisted suicide and the Supreme Court: Implications...
The goals of medicine conference: Bringing the issues to the ...
Lessons about strategic information in home healthcare...
Midwifery goes mainstream as hospitals expand options and cut...
Managing fatigue in operational settings 1: Physiological...
Managing fatigue in operational settings 2: An integrated...
The social responsibility of hospitals. (cover story)
Texas gears up for star + plus. (cover story)
Managerial roles in contemporary hospital departments. (cover story)
Job satisfaction of selected categories of Utah hospital... (cover story)
Beyond JCAHO: Using competency models to improve healthcare... (cover story)
Organizational characteristics, perceived work stress, and... (cover story)
Natural history of early primary biliary cirrhosis.
Factors that affect outcome of in-vitro fertilisation treatment.
Randomised trial of efficacy of benznidazole in treatment of early Trypanosoma cruzi infection.
Risk of aspirin-associated major upper-gastrointestinal bleeding with enteric-coated or buffered...
Mutation of gene for mannose-binding protein associated with chronic hepatitis B viral infection.
3-D imaging of residual limbs using ultrasound.
Instantaneous centers of rotation in dorsi/plantar flexion movements of posterior-type plastic...
Mechanical advantage in wheelchair lever propulsion: Effect on physical strain and efficiency.
Biomechanical properties of human tibias in long-term spinal cord injury.
Low back pain assessment training of industry-based physicians.
Decreasing disability in chronic back pain through aggressive spine rehabilitation.
Use of chiropractic manipulation in lumbar rehabilitation.
Classification of back muscle impairment based on the surface electromyographic signal.
Development of new protocols and analysis procedures for the assessment of LBP by surface EMG techn.
The use of surface EMG power spectral analysis in the evaluation of back muscle function.
Endurance of trunk muscles in persons with chronic low back pain: Assessment, performance, training.
Distribution of tissue loads in the low back during a variety of daily and rehabilitation tasks.
Modeling of functional trunk muscle performance: Interfacing ergonomics and spine rehabilitation...
Electrokinesiologic measurement of trunk sagittal mobility and lumbar erector spinae muscle activit.
`Academic freedom': Two words in search of common ground.
How to stop the university from self-destructing.
Resentment: The academic vice.
Bringing the humanities down to Earth.
The realm of government, the realm of ethics.
Slogans, amens, and speech codes.
Free speech and liberal education.
Why the American Civil Liberties Union opposes campus hate speech codes.
Poaching in the groves of academe.
Fair use: Use it or lose it.
Unlearning liberty in seminars and cinemas.
The assault on the universities: Then and now.
On the effectiveness and irrelevancy of tenure.
It's not the tenure, it's the radicalism.
Testimony on preferences in California schools.
College 101: A dubious remedy for dropouts.
Against the ostrich syndrome.
Nonconformist intellectuals today.
Rising the price for higher education.
Grow up, why dontcha?.
Rolls-Royce: How a legend was made.
Contemplating the sublime.
Father's tales.
Philosophy into fiction.
The Nuremberg Trial: Fifty years later.
Donald Davie: 1922-1995.
By O'Hara besotted.
Queen Victoria's diamond jubilee.
Leon Eidel: The life of a biographer.
Depression: Darker than darkness.
Peter Arno meets Somerset Maugham.
There's rosemary for remembrance.
The aging of democracies.
From silence to sound and back again: Music, literature, and history.
Hamlet, James, and the Woman Question.
Home Ec. with Mrs. Beeton.
Symmes Hole, Or the South Polar Romance.
The enchantments of Circe.
The cultural presence of autistic lives.
Carlyle, Descartes, and Objectivity.
No.
Love among the puppets.
On pluralism.
The letters of Hart Crane.
Don DeLillo: Americana, Mao II, and Underworld.
Fever.
Out a little from the land.
In the shadow of memory.
Russia's new law on religion: Progress or regress?
The wisdom of Solomon as political theology.
Roman Catholicism in today's Russia: The troubled heritage.
Religion within the limits of liberalism alone?
Reports from the trenches: A case study of religious freedom issues faced by Wiccans practicing in...
Freedom of conscience rights: Lessons for Great Britain.
`God--and a religious president... [or] Jefferson and no God': Campaigning for a voter-imposed...
Notes on church-state affairs: United States.
Text of U.S. Supreme Court decision.
Russian Federation federal law: `On Freedom of Conscience and on Religious Associations'.
Memory distortion in group recall.
Parallel processing in visual perception and memory: What goes where and when?
Age-related change in visual information processing: Toward a unified theory of aging and visual...
Cued vs. free recall in long-term memory of the fifty United States.
The wrath of Ajax: A psychoanalytic study of Elizabethan...
Perceptions of wisdom associated with selected occupations...
Aging mothers' and adult daughters' retrospective ratings...
Gender differences in phonetic processing.
CAGING THE CRAZY.
An image to heal.
The Struggle for Walden.
The ULTIMATE CIVIL LIBERTY.
Foreign Political Interference...Vatican Style.
EMPOWERMENT OF THE POOR.
Sealed with Controversy: Anatomy of Activism at the Local Level.
The Blues Artist As Cultural Rebel. (cover story)
What Quinlan Can Tell Kevorkian About the Right to Die.
Brain research and folk psychology.
How to a kick a national habit.
The Tenacity of Error in the Treatment of Addiction.
The Silent Epidemic.
Why Don't We Care About the Poor Anymore?
The Tragedy of Hong Kong.
UNEQUAL JUSTICE.
Filling the Gaps in Amnesty International's Freedom Collage.
Protecting Our Children from Internet Smut.
Storm Troopers in the Culture War. (cover story)
PK Publicity and Production.
How Fundamentalism Affects Society. (cover story)
A Humanist Among the Faithful. (cover story)
The Only Reason You Want to Go to Heaven Is That You Have...
Physician aid in dying.
A New Father's Story.
Pantheism.
Could democracy be a unicorn?
Gender and postmodern communication.
Scholarly communication through electronic mailing.
Why do the police interview eyewitnesses?...
Psychosocial adjustment in male-to-female transsexuals...
Psychophysiological aspects of Tourette's Syndrome.
Misconceptions about sample size, statistical significance...
Recent theological observations on magisterial documents and public dissent.
Patristic testimony on women's ordination in Inter insigniores.
Ordinary and extraordinary treatments: When does quality of life count?
WEPP: Spiling the secrets of water erosion. (cover story)
Using heat to study ice damage in plants.
Aerenchyma.
Less fire, more science for grass growers.
Boosting ellagic acid in strawberries.
Aussie weevil opens attack on rampant melaleuca.
The whitefly plan -- 5-year update. (cover story)
Sustaining agriculture in drought years.
Novel alfalfa cleans fertilizer spill.
Preparing agriculture for a changing world. (cover story)
Mass-reared insects get fast-food. (cover story)
Fire blight under wraps.
Gearing up to grow rice for Japan. (cover story)
With IPM, bigger areas are better. (cover story)
Potatoes, once again under fungal attack.
A closeup look at white-speck neps in cotton.
Growers support research that supports farming.
The muscadine.
A new melon disease: Yellow vine.
Corn belt growers give areawide IPM a try.
GEM searches for treasures in exotic maize. (cover story)
Floral gems.
Stopping erosion with gypsum and PAM.
Value Orientations in Military Academies: A Thirteen Country Study.
Warriors for Peace: The Next Generation of U.S. Military Leaders.
Are Military Professionals Bound by a Higher Moral Standard?
Perceived Security Threat and the Global Refugee Crisis.
The Effects of Race on Procedural Justice: The Case of the Uniform Code of Military Justice.
Sexual Harassment, Cohesion, and Combat Readiness in U.S. Army Support Units.
N'angasy Varoyi, and Midzimu: The Institutionalization of Traditional Beliefs in the Zimbabwe National Army.
The Military and Politics in a Theocratic State: Iran as Case Study.
Do Attitudes Matter? The Military and Democratic Consolidation in Greece.
Zero Draft in the Low Countries: The Final Shift to the All-volunteer Force.
Home composting makes major impact.
Reaching higher on the waste chain.
Year end review of recycling and composting.
As neighbors close in, composter gets enclosed.
What's wrong with office paper?
Restoring a Superfund site with biosolids and fly ash.
Investing in organics diversion at state prisons.
Composting is alive and well in central Texas.
Decentralized route to recycling organics.
Growing markets for scrap tires.
Disease suppression on the links.
Food residuals management in Korea.
Odor modeling as a tool in site planning.
Finding profits in organics recycling.
Collecting residential yard trimmings.
Municipal experiences with marketing compost.
Improving collection for food residuals.
Materials recovery facilities: A 1997 update.
Processing and marketing woody materials.
Composter finds liquid supply.
Cocomposting fish and paper pulp residuals.
Innovative biofilter controls odors.
In dispraise of reductionism.
How wild wolves became domestic dogs.
Out on a limb.
Himalayan forests and ecological generalizations.
Economic and environmental benefits of biodiversity.
Fires, hurricanes, and volcanoes: Comparing large disturbances.
The natural flow regime.
Leaf form and photosynthesis. (cover story)
The first half century: A history of AIBS. (cover story)
AIBS presidents revisit the past.
Pacific salmon bring it all back home.
Evolutionary biology in the medical curriculum--what every physician should know.
Kinship and cannibalism.
Biological corridors: Form, function, and efficacy.
Genome resource banks.
Ecosystem science for the twenty-first century.
A survey of the status of state-level environmental education in the United States.
Testing a conceptual framework of responsible environmental behavior.
Analysis of environmental concepts and attitudes among biology degree students.
Perspectives on environmental action: Reflection and revision through practical experience.
The greening of a business school.
Rapid Assessment for Conservation Education (RACE).
Consumer choice in an ecological context: A course...
The identification of empirically derived goals for...
Games in instruction leading to environmentally...
The potential role of virtual reality in environmental...
Traveling boxes: A new tool for environmental education. (cover story)
Evaluation of Australian government literature on the... (cover story)
Environmental education in Illinois and Wisconsin: A tale...
Environmental problem-solving ability: Profiles in application... (cover story)
Incorporating environmental behavior, ethics, and values...
USEPA waste disposal shareware: Purdue University and USEPA...
Toward a theory of commitment to environmental education...
Effects of participation in class activities on children's...
Tragedy in Rwanda: The political ecology of conflict. (cover story)
Environmental taxes: Is there a double dividend?
The Global Environment Facility: New progress on development bank governance.
1995 logging without laws: Legislating by budget rider.
Preparing for El Nino: What role for forecasts?
Using Forest Plantations to Spare Natural Forests. (cover story)
The nuclear weapons legacy.
Are mega cities viable?
Code green.
Mexico City: Metaphor for the World's urban future.
Science to serve the common good.
China shoulders the cost of environmental change.
Local exchange trading systems and sustainable development.
Mitigating climate change.
What to expect from Kyoto.
How the public views climate change.
The science of climate change.
Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation.
Economic and Social Dimensions.
Is Joint Implementation a realistic option?
Reducing the impacts of roads on tropical forests.
Joint implementation.
Will erosion threaten agricultural productivity? (cover story)
Extended product responsibility.
Strategies for conserving biodiversity.
Improving environmental management.
IBM S/390 Parallel Enterprise Servers G3 and G4.
S/390 Parallel Enterprise Server Generation 3: A balanced system and cache structure.
Shared-cache clusters in a system with a fully shared memory.
Print-quality enhancement in electrophotographic printers. (cover story)
Use of the transform exit sequence in printing and as a... (cover story)
Design of component-supply contract with ... (cover story)
A two-step computation of cyclic redundancy code CRC-32...
Improving the memory-system performance of sparse-matrix...
A study of the representation of fractal curves by L ...
Recursion leads to automatic variable blocking for dense ...
Expert systems usage and knowledge acquisition: An empirical assessment of analogical reasoning in the evaluation of internal controls.
Response scales in risk judgments: The effects of representation, fineness and user choice.
Information ethics: An exploratory study from an international perspective.
Friction in the design of information systems: The design dilemma.
The REA accounting model: Intellectual heritage and prospects for progress.
Spotted seals, Phoca largha, in Alaska.
Catch and bycatch in the Shark Drift Gillnet Fishery off Georgia and East Florida.
Blue crab, Callinectes sapidus, trap selectivity studies: Mesh size.
The California red sea urchin, Strongylocentrotus franciscanus, fishery: Catch, effort, and...
Simulated and actual effects of the brown shrimp, Penaeus aztecus, closure in Mexico.
Safety training and ocean fishing.
The 1996 U.S. purse seine fishery for tropical tunas in the Central-Western Pacific Ocean.
An observed entanglement of Lagenorhynchus obliquidens in the High Seas Driftnet area in the...
The status of queen conch, Strombus gigas, research in the Caribbean.
Estimation of standardized effort in the heterogeneous Gulf of Mexico shrimp fleet.
International Joint Power Generation Conference and Exposition.
The resource file.
Calculating entropy with CFD.
How nature takes shape. (cover story)
A future for biomass.
Bubbles aboard the shuttle.
New products.
Millenial mayhem for manufacturing.
Carbon composites fly high.
An explosion in microsystems technology.
Re-engineering virtual prototypes.
Ceramics for turbine engines.
Brazil: Moving targets.
Dolly's fashion and Louis's passion.
Who's seen Noah's ark?
Where ancient stories guide children home.
Human monkey see, human monkey do.
A lone prairie.
Quantum oscillations ring out loud and clear.
Exhaustive searching is less tiring with a bit of quantum...
Are there really electrons? Experiment and reality.
The leptons after 100 years.
When the electron falls apart.
On some modern uses of the electron in logic and memory.
Reading and writing with electron beams.
Exhibitors program.
New products.
Hipparcos parallax data may reconcile ages at globular...
A nobel tale of postwar injustice. (cover story)
1997 PSA International Conference of Photography.
Larger formats: Costs.
You're invited!
The Silk Road through Pakistan.
Tours--tours--tours!
How to make slide montages.
Suggestions for a membership drive.
Who's who.
AMR: A crucial element in developing a comprehensive customer service strategy.
Remediation of contaminated stormwater canal at Miami International Airport.
Saving money through the use of optimization analysis.
City cuts costs, improves accuracy with radio frequency meter reading.
Technology focus.
Technology focus.
Removing nitrate from groundwater.
A safe option for disinfection: On-site sodium...
Technology focus.
Energy efficiency: Learning how to avoid taking a bath...
Shutting down reservoirs for renovation.
Does self monitoring work? A review of procedures...
Product highlights.
Privatization of wastewater treatment facilities...
Concrete repair and protection with corrosion inhibitor.
The effect of nitrification on sampling sites.
WEM products.
Water disinfection project addresses Aral Sea crisis.
Citizens advisory groups: The pluses, the pitfalls and...
Technology focus.
Pulling the plug on corrosion.
Objectives matrix provides information balance.
Understanding and solving fracture flow problems.
WEFTEC products.
Technology focus.
Wem products.
Understanding gay and lesbian youth: Sticks, stones, and...
Reading Comprehension as a Social Act--Implications for Secondary Schools.
Intertextual Intentions: Making Connections across Texts.
Reading Comprehension in Mathematics.
Remembering That Reading Is `A Way of Happening.'.
Two Steps Forward, Three Steps Back: The Stormy History of Reading Comprehension Assessment.
Clueless Newbies in the MUDs: An Introduction to Multiple-User Environments.
Challenging the Status Quo of Teacher Education Programs.
People First Language in Middle and High Schools: Usability and Readability.
Art as a Theoretical Base for the Postmodern Curriculum.
The Use of Children's Literature in Middle School Social Studies: What Research Does and Does Not...
Reflection--in portfolios and beyond.
Portfolio reflection: The basis for dialogue.
Reflection, self-assessment, and learning.
Teaching writing with reflective questions and reflective events.
Learning to reflect: A classroom experiment.
Studying teachers' transformations: Reflection as methodology.
Inviting dialogue: An alternative to teaching in the dark.
Searching under surfaces: Reflection as an antidote for forgery.
Understanding our students: A case study method.
Professional development schools: Catalysts for collaboration and change.
Educated candies: A classroom business planned and managed by students.
Key elements of effective teaching in block periods.
Collaborative learning through high-level verbal interaction: From theory to practice.
Transfer shock in an academic discipline: The relationship between students' majors and their academic performance.
Developing a Paraeducators Career Ladder as a Comprehensive Approach for Training Select Future Teachers. (cover story)
High school success and school accountability begin with tentative job-career plans for each student.
Suggestions for producing teaching excellence.
Clinical supervision in teacher evaluation: A pivotal factor in the quality management of education.
Alleviating stress in pre-service teachers during field experiences.
Preservice teacher case study responses: A preliminary attempt to describe program impact.
Historical and contemporary models of attention processes with implications for learning.
Use of reframing as a classroom strategy.
Constructivism and technology: Instructional designs for...
Accuracy of teaching evaluation information systems: A...
Organizational dimensions of climate and the impact on...
Cultural sensitivity: A factor in the success for students...
Journeys inward and outward: A class in racial understanding.
The negative effects of using a group contingency system...
An examination of the CATM blocks and block pattern...
Communications on education goals: Perceptions of educational goals set by grandparents for their...
Sequence in primary grade mathematics.
A case study of the social needs of Danisha: An underachieving gifted African-American female[*].
Gender differences in science education: The double-edged role of prior knowledge in physics.
Gender differences in attitudes, skills, and behaviors among academically talented university freshmen.
An intergenerational study of three gifted women: Obstacles and challenges confronting women of high potential.
Gifted women and teaching: A compatible choice?
Growing up feeling special: Retrospective reflections of eminent Canadian women.
Meeting in the middle: Gifted education and middle schools working together.
Teacher ratings of Hispanic and Anglo students on a behavior rating scale.
The pentagonal implicit theory of giftedness revisited: A cross-validation in Hong Kong.
Temperament, self-regulation, and education.
Inhibited and uninhibited children: Challenges in school settings.
The role of emotionality and regulation in empathy-related responding.
Temperament and behavior problems in the classroom.
Temperament and personality theory: The perspective of cognitive-experiential self-theory.
The Science and art of using temperament as the basis for intervention.
Temperament constructs and measures.
Self-modeling as an intervention for stuttering.
More ups and downs of subtest analysis: Criterion validity of the DAS with an unselected cohort.
The use of weekly performance feedback to increase teacher implementation of a prereferral academic intervention.
FOR THE PROTECTION OF THE CHILDREN: THE POLITICS OF MINORITY CHILDHOOD IN IRELAND.
INSIDE AND "OUTSIDE" SPANISH FLAMENCO: GENDER CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANDALUSIAN CONCEPTS OF FLAMENCO TRADITION.
LA COMPARSA Y EL CONCURSO: ANDALUSIAN CARNIVAL ON-STAGE.
NAMING RESISTANCE: ETHNOGRAPHERS, DISSIDENTS, AND STATES.
ETHNICITY AND THE ANTHROPOLOGIST: NEGOTIATING IDENTITIES IN THE FIELD.
LINKING STATE AND SELF: HOW THE JAPANESE STATE BUREAUCRATIZES SUBJECTIVITY THROUGH MORAL EDUCATION.
MONEY AND THE MORAL ORDER IN LATE NINTEENTH AND EARLY TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN CAPITALISM.
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF THE OTHER: FIELDWORK IN EL BARRIO.
MAGICAL LITERACY: ENCOUNTERING A WITCH'S BOOK IN ECUADOR.
Economic Freedom, Political Freedom, and Economic Well-being: A Causality Analysis.
Banking Structures, Market Forces, and Economic Freedom: Lessons From Argentina and Mexico.
Official Assistance, Economic Freedom, and Policy Change: Is Foreign Aid Like Champagne?
Economic Freedom and Human Welfare: Some Empirical Findings.
B.R. Shenoy: Stature and impact.
The Cote D'Ivoire's troubled economy: Why World Bank intervention failed.
Deregulated private water supply: A policy option for developing countries.
Harmonizing ethnic claims in Africa: A proposal for ethnic-based federalism.
The unintended consequences of trade adjustment assistance.
The problem of lemons and why we must retain juvenile crime records.
A vote for Perot was a vote for the status quo.
Securities unites of banking conglomerates: Should their be regulated?
Life-cycle rituals in Dongyang County: time, affinity, and exchange in rural China.
The institution of woman-marriage in Africa: A Cross-cultural analysis[1].
Group identities and the construction of the 1943 rescue of the Danish Jews.
The Maasai ornithorium: Tropic flights of avian imagination in Africa.
History and social structure: A study of the Sefwi residential system (Ghana).
Rulers and rainmakers in precolonial South Pare, Tanzania: Exchange and ritual experts in...
Aztec human sacrifice: Cross-cultural assessments of the ecological hypothesis.
Care of elders in the community: Moral lives, moral quandaries.
Old ethical frameworks: What works, what doesn't?
An ethic of care.
The science and ethics of long-term care.
Creating an ethical organization.
Cross-cultural geriatric ethics: Negotiating our differences.
Addressing prejudice: The effects of ethical perspectives.
Ethics and the frontline long-term-care worker: A challenge for the 21st century.
Care at home: Virtue in multigenerational households.
Vulnerabilities of clients and caregivers in the homecare setting.
Measures of physical functioning.
Brief measures of depression and cognitive function.
Measures of quality of life and subjective well-being.
Measures of social support and caregiver burden.
Promoting Intergenerational Strategies: The Role of the Corporation for National Service.
Advancing an Intergenerational Agenda for the Twenty-First Century.
Fantasy, geography, Wagner, and opera[a].
Beekeeping and local self-reliance in rural Southern Africa[a].
American roads, roadside America[a].
NGO landscapes in the Maya Biosphere Reserve, Guatemala[a].
J. B. Jackson as a critic of modern architecture.
On modern Vernaculars and J. B. Jackson.
J. B. Jackson and the play of the mind: Inquiry and assertion as contact sports.
Brinck Jackson in the realm of the everyday.
The Monument And The Bungalow.
Midtowns, Megastructures, And World Cities.
The Photographic Construction Of Tourist Space In Victorian America.
Honduras: When the Saints Arrive.
The National Road, or, a Landward Salient for a Potamic People.
Emergence of Surfing Resorts on the Aquitaine Littoral.
J. B. Jackson and Geography.
The Effects of Combining a Fitness Emphasis During Motor Skill Practice on Third Grader's...
Ethical Decision-Making: Issues and Applications to American Sport.
Health Enhancement in Montana: Is the Glass Half-Empty or Half Full?
Demonstrating the Need for Formal Graduate Student Training In Effective Teaching Practices.
The Effects of Two Instructional Formats on the Heart Rate Intensity and Skill Development of...
Go With Their Flow: How Flow Theory Can Help Practitioners to Intrinsically Motivate Children to...
Changing Attitudes And Expectations In A University Setting: A Case Study.
Undergraduate students report their meaning and...
Prospective physical education teachers' attitudes...
The socialization strategies of first-year physical...
Why do some students who are good at physical education...
Behaviors of inner-city teachers following the introduction...
The Relationship Between Transformational Leadership Behaviors of Athletic Directors and Coaches' Job Satisfaction.
A Survey of Health-Related Physical Fitness Knowledge Among Preservice and Inservice Physical Educators.
The History of Women's Professional Basketball in the United States with an Emphasis on the Old WBL and the New ABL and WNBA.
Using Novel and Challenging Introductory Activities and Fitness Routines to Emphasize Regular Activity and Fitness Objectives in Middle School Physical Education.
Implementing a Peer Tutor Program: Strategies for Practitioners.
Is America an experiment?
Does immigration harm the poor?
The limits of campaign spending limits.
Washington versus school reform.
Getting serious about school discipline.
Civic education reconsidered.
Enforcing `statutory rape'?
The case against teacher certification.
The college and the city: Then and now.
Sports stadium boondoggle.
Incorporating Unique Learning Requirements Into the Design of Instructional Strategies for...
Measurement of Women's Child Sexual Abuse Experiences: An Empirical Demonstration of the Impact of Choice of Measure on Estimates of Incidence Rates and of Relationships With Pathology.
Feigning Sexual Desire: Consenting to Unwanted Sexual Activity in Heterosexual Dating Relationships.
Egalitarian, Sexist, and Aggressive Sexual Materials: Attitude Effects and Viewer Responses.
Casual Sex on Spring Break: Intentions and Behaviors of Canadian Students.
In a Conversational Idiom.
Contentious Conversation.
Conversational Evidence for Rethinking Meaning.
Continuity or Rupture: The City, Post-Apartheid.
What Shall We Tell the Children?
Language, Mythology, and Enlightenment: Historical Notes on Horkheimer and Adorno's Dialectic of Enlightenment.
Writings, Ruins, and Their Reading: The Dead Sea Discoveries as a Case Study in Theory Formation and Scientific Interpretation(*).
The Prophet and the Dandy: Philosophy as a Way of Life in Nietzsche and Foucault.
Tolerance as Grace and as Rightful Recognition(*).
The Ecole Libre at the New School, 1941-1946.
Adolph Lowe's Political Economics: A Review Essay.
Game theory and professional baseball: Mixed-strategy models.
Political crisis and renewal in Kenya--prospects for democratic consolidation.
The incomplete transition: The constitutional and electoral context in Kenya.
African perspectives on democracy and the dilemmas of postcolonial intellectuals.
A research proposal funded by the Social Science Research Council: Identity and the negotiation of displacement in Southeastern Guinea, West Africa.
Citizenship amid economic and political change in Kenya.
Who are the indigenous Tanzanians? Competing conceptions of Tanzanian citizenship in the business community.
Cultivating citizenship through xenophobia in Gabon, 1960-1995.
The dialectics of citizenship and ethnicity in Guinea.
Citizenship and populism in the new South Africa.
Citizenship and place: Spatial definitions of oppression and agency in South Africa.
Identity, citizenship, and transnationalism: Ismailis in Tanzania and Burundians in the diaspora.
Ghanaians, Ghanaian Canadians, and Asantes: Citizenship and identity among migrants in Toronto.
Legacies of Exclusion: Illegal Chinese Immigration during the Cold War Years. (cover story)
Building the Ideal Immigrant: Reconciling Lithuanianism and 100 Percent Americanism to Create a Respectable Nationalist Movement, 1870-1922.
The Pedagogy of Public History.
The triad of Roman authority: Fascism, the Vatican, and Italian religious clergy in the Italian...
Black families and migration to a multiracial society: Portland, Oregon, 1900-1924.
Hardliners v. `Dialogueros': Cuban Exile Political Groups and United States--Cuba Policy.
From Acadien to Cajun to Cadien: Ethnic Labelization and Construction of Identity.
African Americans and the Mau Mau Rebellion: Militancy, Violence, and the Struggle for Freedom.
The Voices of Jewish Immigrant Mothers in the Yivo American Jewish Autobiography Collection.
Book reviews.
Book reviews.
The nine lives of Cherum, the Pai Tokumhet.
Navajo livestock reduction in southeastern Utah, 1933-46: History repeats itself.
The question of regional bands and subtribes among the pre-conquest Pai (Hualapai and Havasupai) Indians of Northwestern Arizona.
Translocations and transformations identity in N. Scott Momaday's The Ancient Child.
Towards a post-imperial, transnational American studies:...
The murderous mother and the solicitous father: Violence...
From many, two: A bibliographic history of Canadian-American...
Consuming questions: Scholarship on consumerism in America...
Teaching history in Belarus: Differences in teaching...
Gloria Naylor's Bailey's Cafe: The blues and beyond.
Recent scholarship and findings about the Korean War.
Younger British siblings: Canada and Australia grow up in the shadow of the United States.
Plain storytelling: Belva Plain discusses her fiction.
Supersalesman for the great society: Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, 1965-1969.
Islamism and the Recolonization of Algeria.
Economic Reform and Tunisia's Hegemonic Party: The End of the Administrative Elite.
Bangladesh-India Relations: The Ganges Water-Sharing Treaty and Beyond.
New Rhetoric, Old Directions: Public Policy in the Hong Kong SAR.
NATO's Expensive Trip East.
Greece and Turkey.
Christian Democracy Resurgent.
Language Follows Power.
Making Bosnia Work.
The Exit Strategy Delusion.
Is China Democratizing?
The Dalai Lama's Dilemma.
Fixing the Other Asia.
E Pluribus, India.
The Ultimate Lagging Indicator.
Runaway Diseases.
Retrogressive Little Wars.
Illiberal Illusions.
License to Kill. (cover story)
Fiddling in Rome.
Tokyo's Depression Diplomacy. (cover story)
The Problem of Memory. (cover story)
The Testing of American Foreign Policy. (cover story)
Misunderstanding Europe.
Catastrophic Terrorism. (cover story)
OPEC as Omen.
Israel after Heroism.
Economic reform and democratization in Argentina and Uruguay: The tortoise and the hare revisited?
State interests and the new industrial policy in Brazil: The privatization of steel, 1990-1994.
Incomplete democracy in Central America: Polarization and voter turnout in Nicaragua and El...
Introduction.
The 1988 Constitution a decade later: Ugly compromises reconsidered.
The politics of decentralized federalism, national diversification, and regionalism in Brazil.
Brazilian politicians and neoliberalism: Mapping support for the Cardoso reforms, 1995-1997.
Corporatism, neoliberalism, and the failed revolt of big business: Lessons from the case of IEDI.
Racial representation and Brazilian politics: Black members of the National Congress, 1983-1999.
The Cardoso government's reform agenda: A view from the National Congress, 1995-1998.
The Asian Connection: The U.S.-Caribbean Apparel Circuit and a New Model of Industrial Relations.
Transnational Peasant Politics in Central America.
Paradoxes of Gendered Political Opportunity in the Venezuelan Transition to Democracy.
Continuity and Change in Elections in the City of Buenos Aires, 1931-1954.
Environmental Networking in Mexico: The Comite Nacional para la Defensa de los Chimalapas.
Is the Drive Toward Free-Market Globalization Stalling?
Teaching children with ADHD -- what do elementary and...
Incorporating the first ladies into the classroom.
Theme study in elementary-school social studies...
Thai exchange students' encounters with ethnocentrism.
The best museum for kids? -- the one they build themselves!
Special section on anthropology in the classroom.
Smithsonian publications bring anthropology to the classroom.
Helping students deal with cultural differences.
Pathway to the past: Archaeology education in...
Precollegiate anthropology: Its potential for the...
Remembering the Maine: Teaching about the Spanish-American...
Life in the Transition Economies.
The National Council on Economic Education and Its Role in Economic Education in the Transition...
Archaeology and Intercultural Education in the Elementary Grades: An Example from Minnesota.
Delving into the Past--County Court Records and the Pursuit of History.
Susanna Rowson: Early American Geography Educator.
Incorporating Women's Voices into the Middle and Senior High School History Curriculum.
Using Literary Themes to Develop Historical Perspective.
Outdoor Learning Centers: Realistic Social Studies Experiences for K-6 Students.
Is Service Learning a Good Idea? Data from the National Longitudinal Study of 1998.
The High School Geography Project: A Retrospective View.
Commenting on Generation X Goes to College.
`That's a Good Quote--What's the Source?'.
Using an Inquiry Approach with Preservice Teachers to Explain the Process of Facts, Concept...
The Problems of Junior Secondary Teachers of Social Studies in Botswana.
Walking on the Wild Side: Geographic Field Study for Fifth graders.
Foreword to the Future.
Authorship in African Art.
Beyond Master Hands.
Olowe of Ise.
Fre Seyon.
The Naming Game.
Elephant women, furious and majectic.
Women's masks and the power of gender in Mande history.
Honoring Ejagham women.
Women = Masks: Initiation Arts in North-Western...
The African Collection at Liverpool Museum.
The Agbeni Shango Shrine in Ibadab a Century of Continuity.
Float Traditions in Sierra Leone and the Gambia.
The Mural Art of Basotho Women.
What Is `Chinese narrative illustration'?
The painter's presence: Signatures in Venetian Renaissance pictures.
Thomas Gainsborough's Ann Ford.
The expressive body in Goya's Saint Francis Borgia at the Deathbed of an Impenitent.
Structure/ornament and the Modern Figuration of Architecture.
Pissarro, landscape, vision, and tradition.
Art-making behavior: Why and how arts education is central...
Educating digiterati.
Arts education research: A reassessment.
Research, policy, and practice in arts education: Meeting...
Negotiatio of Scientific Discourse in the First Printed Edition of the Historia de La Donzella Teodor (Toledo: Pedro Hagenbach, Ca. 1500). (cover story)
The Art of 'Sailing' in La Lozana Andaluza.
A Harmony of Whims: Towards A Discourse of Identity in Dario's "Palabras Liminares".
Epos delendum est: The subject of Carthage in Garcilaso's `A Boscan desde `La Goleta''.
In search of salvation: The deification of Isabel La Catolica in conversabo poetry.
Monarchy and the limits of exemplarity in the teatro palaciego of Francois Bances Candamo.
The formation of Old Spanish buey(s), bueyes, grey(s), greyes, ley(s), leyes, rey(s), reyes: A...
The performing spectator in Alejo Carpentier's fictional world.
Yankee invasion of Mexico, or Mexican invasion of Hollywood? Hollywood's renewed Spanish...
Gender troubles in Neville D'Almeida's Dama do lotacao.
Don't look back: Myths, conceptions, and receptions of Black Orpheus.
From the religious moral sense to the post-Freudian common sense: Images of national history in...
Representing racial difference: Brazil's Xuxa at the televisual border.
For the people and by the people: TV Maxambomba's regeneration of popular cinema.
MENC today.
Building a professional portfolio.
Thinking critically in the practice room.
The systems approach to music technology.
Electronic intstruments--played or used?
Music standards in Lithuania.
Guitar: A course for all reasons.
GUITAR: Past, present and future.
Counterpoint.
MENC today.
Building a high school music major program.
Teaching for creativity in music performance.
Music and the theory of multiple intelligences.
Improving your IQ--intelligent questioning.
Grading practices in music.
Idea bank.
MENC today.
The use of analogy in the rehearsal.
A scheduling-conflict resolution model.
Can we get students to listen?
Funding music technology.
Idea bank.
An Educational Guide to the December 10, 1998 New York Philharmonic Radio Broadcast.
An American in Paris.
Tiered Evaluation In Large Ensemble Settings.
Defining And Realizing Your Band's Ideal Tone.
Making The Most Of Minimalism In Music.
Music Learning In Your School Computer Lab.
The Wisconsin CMP project at age 21.
The NAEP 1997 arts education assessment: An overview.
NAEP and music: Framework, field test, and assessment.
MENC today.
The unaccompanied choral rehearsal.
Resources for helping blind music students.
Using multimedia to develop musicianship.
Effective practice makes successful performance.
Tune in to technology.
Jean-Francois Lyotard's Underground Aesthetics.
Lyotard in Passing.
Womanstruck.
Photogenic Neurasthenia: On Mass and Medium in the 1920s.
Nauman's Beckett Walk.
My History (The Intractable).
Digital Diploma Mills, Part 1: The Automation of Higher Education.
Digital Diploma Mills, Part 2: The Coming Battle over Online Instruction.
Robinsonnades I & II.
`Judge for yourselves!'--the Degenerate Art exhibition as...
On the holes of history: Gordon Matta-Clark's work in Paris.
Sleazy city: 42nd Street Structures and some qualities of life.
People in the image/people before the image: Address and...
Human Ecological Perspectives on Norse Settlement in the North Atlantic.
Hreggvior's Revenge.
Nordvision on Swedish television.
Knut Hamsun's Taming of the Shrew?
Efterklange of Ossian.
Misogyny, women's language, and love-language.
Transforming female history in Stjorn.
Revenge of the rats.
Destination U.S.A.
Nature imagery and national romanticism in the films of Alf Sjoberg.
Alcohol and alcohol control in Sweden.
Kierkegaard.
Introduction.
Film Form: An Argument for a Functional Theory of Style in the Individual Film.
Stylistic Description as Historical Method: French Films of the German Occupation.
Color at the Center: Minnelli's Technicolor Style in Meet Me in St. Louis.
Forget the Alamo: Reading the Ethics of Style in John Sayles's Lone Star.
Borges and the Classical Hollywood Cinema.
Introduction: Reading Literature and the Ethics of Criticism.
Ethical Criticism: What It Is and Why It Matters.
`Nothing But Face'--`To Hell with Philosophy'?: Witold Gombrowicz, Bruno Schulz, and the Scandal of Human Countenance.
Who Has the Right to Feel?: The Ethics of Literary Empathy.
Lyrical Ethics and Literary Experience.
Lubomir Dolezel: A Checklist of Publications in English, 1966-1998.
BERNARD WILLIAMS, MORAL LAW, AND KAFKA'S DER PROZESS.
THE ETHIC OF TIMING AND THE ORIGIN OF THE NOVEL: SPEAKING TOO SOON IN RABELAIS AND CERVANTES.
INTERNAL COLONIALISM IN THE TESTIMONIAL PROCESS: ELENA PONIATOWSKA'S HASTA NO VERTE JESÚS MÍO.
CONSUMING MIDNIGHT: BAUDELAIRE PREYS ON TIME.
REDEFINING THE AESTHETICS OF FASCISM: THE BATTLE BETWEEN THE ANCIENTS AND THE MODERNS REVISITED.
DAPHNE, APOLLO, AND HOMO LUDENS IN LUIS DE GÓNGORA'S SOLEDAD PRIMERA.
JOSEFINA MOLINA'S ESQUILACHE: EXAMPLE OF FEMINIST FILM TRANSFORMATION?
INTRODUCTION: PERIAUTOGRAPHY AND THE SCHOLAR.
ARCHAELOGY OF THE SOUL? HISTORICAL AND LITERARY ARCHAELOGY?
AUTOBIOGRAPHY AND THE SEARCH FOR TRANSPARENCY.
Body science.
Putting the blame on no-fault.
Senior advisers.
Looking for the good partner.
Paper trailblazer.
One big headache.
Road warrior.
Presidential lessons.
Tender traps.
Make room for daddy.
Divorce--mediation style.
Zapping cyber piracy.
Talking it through.
The clone age.
In the zone.
Let us be `officers of the court'
A conservative juggernaut.
Beat the clock. (cover story)
Changing shifts.
Deadly inspiration.
A wake-up call.
Greetings from independent Hawaii.
Beyond Nuremberg.
Let's make a deal. (cover story)
Avoiding trouble at the mill.
Beyond the courtroom thriller.
M&A is back....
Carving out your niche. (cover story)
Sobering thoughts.
Letting the air out of tort reform.
Zero hour for Hong Kong.
John Hancock.
Discussion after the speeches of Richard Cunningham and Lawrence Herman.
The information revolution -- culture and sovereignty -- a Canadian perspective.
The information revolution -- culture and sovereignty -- a U.S. perspective.
Discussion after the speeches of J. Michael Robinson and John Ragosta.
Sovereignty, trade, and the environment -- a U.S. perspective.
Sovereignty, trade, and the environment -- the North American agreement on environmental cooperation.
Discussion after the speeches of Gary Horlick and Sarah Richardson.
Extraterritorial sanctions in the Canada/U.S. context -- A Canadian perspective.
Extraterritorial sanctions in the Canada/U.S. context -- A U.S. perspective.
Discussion after the speeches of Arthur Downey and Barry Campbell.
Commonality of standards -- Implications for sovereignty -- A U.S. perspective.
Free Lunch or Cheap Fix?: The Emissions Trading Idea and the Climate Change Convention.
Untangling The Nuisance Knot.
Habitat Conservation Plans Under Section 10 of the Endangered Species Act: The Alabama Beach Mouse and the Unfulfilled Mandate of Species Recovery.
Environmental Remediation Through Supplemental Environmental Projects and Creative Negotiation: Renewed Community Involvement in Federal Enforcement.
Beyond the Six Veils: Conceptualizing and Measuring Poverty.
Poverty and Reforms: Friends or Foes?
Poverty Alleviation: Is Economics Any Help? Lessons from the Grameen Bank Experience.
Women and Poverty or Gender and Well-Being?
The Politics of Marginalization: Poverty and the Rights of the Indigenous People in Mexico.
The Cow and the Thing Called `What': Dinka Cultural Perspectives on Wealth and Poverty.
Poverty, Children and Transition in Kyrgyzstan: Some Reflections from the Field.
Is Growth Central to Poverty Alleviation in India?
Property Rights for the Rural Poor: The Challenge of Landlessness.
A Cloth Untrue: The Evolution of Structural Adjustment in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Poverty and Population Issues: Clarifying the Connections.
An Original Model of the Independent Counsel Statute.
The Political Economy of Statutory Reach: U.S. Disclosure Rules in a Globalizing Market for Securities.
Rorty's America.
Dewey and the Threat of Tyranny of the Majority.
Tocqueville's Practical Reason.
The One True Progress.
The Christian democracy of Glenn Tinder and Jacques Maritain.
Democratic man, aristocratic man, and man simply.
The price of freedom.
Judicial lawmaking.
Civil society and the democratic transition in Spain.
Portuguese civil society under dictatorship and democracy, 1910-1996.
Between high politics and civil society.
From lambs to lions.
Aristotle: Religion, politics, and philosophy.
Conservatives, liberals, and the free exercise clause.
Germany and the Future of European Security.
Balancing Development and Democracy.
Supercomputers, Test Ban Treaties, and the Virtual Bomb.
What to Control and How to Control: Nonproliferation Dilemmas.
The Likelihood of Major Conflict in East Asia and the Korean Peninsula.
Observations: The Vatican and Castro's Cuba.
Signs of a democratized foreign policy?
The causes and effects of foreign policy decision making.
Domestic politics and foreign policy.
The impact of culture on African coups d' etat, 1960-1997.
A challenge to European security and alliance unity.
Institutional theory and Southeast Asia.
Sanctioning alternatives in international criminal law.
Acute human trial of the floating mass.
Scanning laser doppler vibrometry of the middle ear ossicles.
Effects of ionomer cement on guinea pig cochleas.
Anatomical results with titanium implants in the mastoid Region.
The bone-anchored hearing aid (BAHA) in children with...
Protection against noise trauma by sound conditioning.
Stapedius tendon reconstruction during stapedotomy: Technique...
Temporal bone fractures inducing facial nerve paralysis: A new classification ... (cover story)
Vasopressin levels in major head and neck surgery. (cover story)
Microsporidium-associated sinusitis. (cover story)
Comparison of ultrasound and x-ray maxillary sinus findings in school ...
The auditory system in humans.
The role of outer hair cell damage in the loss of hearing.
Outer hair cell morphology related to function.
Cochlear amplification and its pathology: Emphasis on the...
Mechanism and prevention of aminoglycoside ototoxicity...
Implantable hearing device performance mesured by laser ...
Recent developments in air-conduction hearing aids.
Masking the protrusion of the receiver-stimulator of ...
Mechanical, acoustic and electromagnetic evaluation of ...
A bone-anchored percutaneous connector system for neural...
Semi-implantable middle ear electromagnetic hearing ...
Papillary carcinoma of the thyroid metastatic to the ...
Sarcoidosis with nasal obstruction and septal perforation.
The efficacy of topical ciprofloxacin in the treatment of chronic suppurative otitis media.
Hamartoma of the larynx: A case of unusual bleeding after microlaryngoscopy.
Evaluation and treatment of head and neck venous vascular malformations.
Continuous, high-frequency objective tinnitus caused by middle ear myoclonus.
Sensorineural hearing loss caused by NSAID-induced aseptic meningitis.
Unusual septoplasty complication: Streptococcus viridans endocarditis.
First branchial cleft anomalies: Report of 12 cases.
The effect of external nasal dilators as measured by acoustic rhinometry.
Evaluation of intraocular pressure and cataract formation following the long-term use of nasal corticosteriods.
Rosai-Dorfman disease (extranodal sinus histiocytosis) in a patient with HIV.
Consequences of differential diagnostic criteria on identification rates of children with...
The influence of peer and educational variables on arrest status among at-risk males.
The effects of teaching school expectations and establishing a consistent consequence on formal...
Educational status of children who are receiving services in an urban family preservation and...
The relationship between program restrictiveness and youth behavior problems.
Behavioral and emotional problems among adolescents of Jamaica and the United States: Parent...
First step to success: An early intervention approach for preventing school antisocial behavior.
A comparison of perspectives about the critical areas of knowledge for safe food handling in food...
Coliform bacteria and nitrate contamination of wells in major soils of Frederick, Maryland.
Environmental Health Policy Decisions.
Ozone Exposures in Rural Maryland's Lower Eastern Shore.
Pollution Prevention Resource.
An approach to managing latex allergy in the health care worker.
Noxious facilities and host community response: A causal framework.
Public health and the environment: Floundering partners.
Grass seed field smoke and its impact on respiratory health.
Use of the exotic plant Oenanthe javanica.
Sun and water: A overview of solar water treatment devices.
A beach-assocated outbreak.
The feasiblity of epidemiologic studies of waterborne arsenic.
An economic development tool or a subtle environmental loophole?
Garbage and Sewage Disposal from Recreational Boats.
Residual Effects of Selected Pyrethroid Insecticides on Lone Star Ticks.
Geographic Information Systems.
Lead Leaching from Faucet Fixtures Under Residential Conditions.
Tribal Perspectives in Natural Resource Management and Environmental Technology Curricula.
More on Handheld Infrared Thermometers.
NEHA Deals a Winning Hand.
Ultraviolet Radiation: Human Exposure and Health Risks.
The Relationship Between Pool Water Quality and Ventilation.
Community Exposure to Sodium Hydroxide in a Public Water Supply.
New Global Health Report Warns About Health Risks of Environmental Degradation.
Getting Yourself Motivated.
Motivating the Minimal Performer.
The Future of Elder Care.
Insurance Status and the Decision to Seek a Legal Opinion for a Medical Malpractice Claim without...
Health Services Technology: Part 2, Policy and Managerial Considerations.
School-Based Clinics: Creating Children That Thrive.
Caught in the Crossfire: Stress in Healthcare Settings and Ways to Address It.
Case Management: Formulating a Better Health Equation.
Breaking Bad News: Current Best Advice for Clinicians.
Breaking Bad News: Encouraging the Adoption of Best Practices.
Health Services Technology: Part 1, Policy and Managerial Considerations.
Showdown: The Dark Side of Medical Power and Academic Pandering.
Cost implications of random mandatory drugs tests in prisons.
Randomised controlled trial of treatment of chronic suppurative otitis media in Kenyan...
Campus diversity in theory and practice.
Black studies: An education or the reflection of a crisis?
`Ways of thinking,' or, the curriculum without content.
Multiculturalism to a point.
The cost and price of college and the value of higher education.
The case for (and against) departmental syllabi.
On submitting to the process of education.
Racial preferences and racial progress: Analyzing Nathan Glazer's argument.
`Revolting behavior' and measured responses.
The corruption that is group preference?
For racial dispensation in admissions.
Manifestations of Illiberalism in Philosophy.
A Welcome for Postcolonial Literature.
An Ideological Agenda for History.
The Vaguest Measure of Faculty Merit.
The Rage for Postism, and a Chinese Scholar's Dissent.
The Culture of Deference.
The Morella Bill, My Daughter Rachel, and the Advancement of Women in Science.
The impious impatience of Job.
My German question.
Fiction at The New Yorker.
Suicide on my mind, Britannica on my table.
Puzzlement.
The art city our fathers built.
Exiting Nirvana.
The real Arcadia.
The king's lobbyists.
Being mugged.
Voices of science.
Virginia Woolf and the death of modernism.
Sand and clouds.
Working-class plain style: William Lovett vs. Carlyle, Gaskell, and others.
Louise Bogan, marvell of her day.
Modern mass to postmodern popular in Barthes's mythologies.
Poetry and politics in A Midsummer Night's Dream.
Daniel Barenboim & Edward Said: A conversation.
The aesthetics of fear.
Explorations in Shakespeare's Language.
Religious Persecution in Today's Germany: Old Habits Renewed.
Rawls and the Challenge of Theocracy to Freedom.
Pope Pius XI's `Encyclical' Humani Generis Unitas Against Racism and Anti-Semitism and the `Silence' of Pope Pius XII.
Towards a Comparative Treatment of Religion: Counterhegemonic and Hegemonic State-Clergy Strategies in Religious Hierarchies of the Russian Road--Iran, Japan, and Russia(n1).
The Political Varieties of Sacred Remembrance: Elie Wiesel and U.S. Foreign Policy.
The Freedom of Religion and Conscience in Finland.
Clinton and the New Covenant: Theology Shaping a New Politics or Old Politics in Religious Garb?
NOTES ON CHURCH-STATE AFFAIRS: United States.
Seventh-day Adventists and the U.S. Courts: Road Signs Along the Route of a Denominationalizing Sect.
The Pluralisms of American `Religious Pluralism'.
Consciousness and reality: Our entry into creation.
Theology and science without dualism.
That every child who wants might learn to dance.
Spiritual geographies.
Adapative and Maladaptive Narcissism among University Faculty, Clergy, Politicians, and Librarians.
The Need for an Evolving Concept of Validity in Industrial and Personnel Psychology: Psychometric, Legal, and Emerging Issues. (cover story)
Multilevel Modeling in Industrial and Personnel Psychology.
The Relationship between Variance Components and Mean Difference Effect Size.
The Defense Mechanisms Inventory: Theoretical and Psychometric Implications.
Dilution in Legal Decision Making: Effect of Non-Diagnostic Information in Relation to Amount of Diagnostic Evidence.
Combating the Crisis in Civil-Military Relations. (cover story)
Women and War.
Twenty-first Century Capitalism To Humanize, Ownerize.
No Vacancy.
Sub-Saharan Africa At the Turning Point.
The Population Wars.
Wash Your Hands.
The Bigoted Scouts of America.
Computing the Mind.
Looking for God in All the Wrong Places.
One Nation Under God...
A Humane Society at Large. (cover story)
Lessons from Cuba.
Materialism and Morality (The Problem with Pinker).
The Continuing Symposium on Humanist Manifesto II.
Reflections.
Has speculative metaphysics a future?
Unity without simplicity: Leibniz on organisms.
Stepping back inside Leibniz's mill[1].
Soul, body and natural immortality.
Causality and creation in Leibniz.
Leibniz's theory of space-time: An approach from his metaphysics[*].
Moral luck, freedom, and Leibniz.
Incommensurability and the best of all possible worlds.
Crying for the Manatees.
Ecoimmunology: Healing the Whole.
Searching for the Sami in early Icelandic sources.
Dego dacca: Like a white man (#418).
Finding and protecting wild relatives of American crops.
Faster, better food analysis.
Outbreak.
Natural environmental protection agents.
Keeping freshness in fresh-cut produce.
Heated air blasts papaya pests. (cover story)
Fire blight control, nature's way.
New live-animal test for scrapie.
The Definite End of the Mass Army in Western Europe?
The U.S. as a "Hot Zone": The Necessity for Medical Defense.
Does Enlistment Propensity Predict Accession? High School Seniors* Plans and Subsequent Behavior.
Value Changes in Four Cohorts at the U.S. Military Academy.
Durkheim's "Heroic Suicide" in Military Combat.
Air Force Pilot Retention: Evaluating the Results of Alternative Models.
Civil Armies, Civil Societies, and NATO's Enlargement.
Predicting the Size of UN Peacekeeping Operations.
Persistent Collective Violence and Early Warning Systems: The Case of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa.
Democratizing Civilian Control: The Polish Case.
Constabulary Attitudes of National Guard and Regular Soldiers in the U.S. Army.
The Sodoeconomic Benefits of Active Military Service to Reservists.
Managing the Enlisted Force: Whistling in the Wind?
BioCycle world.
Regional roundup.
How to succeed with pay as you throw.
Puerto Rico grinds through hurricane debris.
New waste, new world?
Degrading PCBs through composting.
Finding bulk markets for composted manure.
We're in the soils business, remember!
National overview of biosolids management.
Organics residuals management strategies.
Kristiansand leads the way in biowaste composting.
BioCycle World.
Regional roundup.
Analyzing the costs of composting strategies.
The grind after the storm.
Deconstructing buildings at former Army base.
City evaluates biosolids management options.
Egg farm finds composting key to manure management.
Neither sun nor snow slows down these composters.
Compost suppresses disease in the lab and on the fields.
Solid waste composting trending upward.
Vermicomposting food residuals in two steps.
BioCycle world.
Regional roundup.
Multiple sites yield multiple products.
Managing and marketing urban greenery.
From ice cream to nuts in food residuals composting.
Transitions at a biosolids composting site.
The cover story.
Batch tunnel composting in Europe.
Solid waste composting trends and projects.
Global roundup.
On-farm composting in Austria and Switzerland.
Keeping organics out of landfills.
BioCycle world.
Telomere tales.
Research updates.
Behavioral Development in the Spotted Hyena. (cover story)
Role of Grazing in Mediterranean Rangeland Ecosystems.
Creating and Restoring Wetlands.
Sex and the C-Fern: Not just another life cycle.
AIBS represented at CELS education workshop.
Of mice and mammoths.
Making science news.
Metamorphosis Is Not a New Beginning. (cover story)
Photosynthetic Organs of Desert Plants.
Nitrogen Saturation in Temperate Forest Ecosystems.
Monitoring populations of plants and animals.
Saving habitat and conserving biodiversity on a crowded planet.
The Storied Curriculum: Oral Narrative, Ethics, and Environmental Education.
Perception of Environmental Risk Related to Gender, Community Socioeconomic Setting, Age, and...
Evaluating Adult Groundwater Education.
Evaluation Techniques for the Sandy Point Discovery Center, Great Bay National Estuarine Research...
Enhancing Conservation Education Opportunities in Nature Reserves in Tropical Countries: A Case...
Content Analysis of Tropical Conservation Education Programs: Elements of Success.
Caring for nature 101, or alternative perspectives on...
Significant life experiences revisited: A review of research...
Using natural settings for environmental education: Perceived...
Controlling the ecotourist in a wild dolphin feeding program:...
A comparison of geographic membership patterns in three...
Children's environmental response inventory among Finnish...
On the miscibility of science and environmental education.
Ecological education.
The influence of short-term outdoor ecology education on...
Responsible journalism, environmental advocacy, and the great...
Analyzing neutral responses on environmental issues: The case...
Using a vignette technique to compare various groups' beliefs...
Environmental education for the nonenvironmental engineering...
The tragedy of the commons 30 years later.
Partners in policymaking: Forging effective federal-state relations.
Dispelling the myths of the acid rain story.
A new strategic vision.
What does sustainability really mean? The search for useful indicators.
Successful collaboration.
Technology transfer and the climate change debate.
Poison and profits. (cover story)
Managing transboundary resources.
In the wake of the Exxon Valdez.
Environmental taxes. (cover story)
Aerial assault on the tsetse fly.
Data compression technology in ASIC cores.
A fast hardware data compression algorithm and some algorithmic extensions.
Design considerations for the ALDC cores.
A JBIG-ABIC compression engine for digital document processing.
Performance as a function of compression.
The Qx-coder.
The IBM JBIG-ABIC verification suite.
Integrating the MPEG-2 subsystem for digital television.
A decompression core for PowerPC.
Modular nets (MNETS): A modular design methodology for computer timers.
Applications of electrochemical microfabrication: An introduction.
Damascene copper electroplating for chip interconnections.
Electrochemical process for advanced package fabrication.
Metallization by plating for high-performance multichip modules.
Thin-film module packages for high-end IBM servers.
Electrolessly deposited diffusion barriers for microelectronics.
Computer Auditor Reliance on Automated and Non-Automated Controls as a Function of Training and Experience.
The Association of Perceived Disaster Recovery Plan Strength with Organizational Characteristics.
Effects of Gear Modifications on the Trawl Performance and Catching Efficiency of the West Coast Upper Continental Slope Groundfish Survey Trawl.
The Origin of the Florida Sponge Fishery.
Blue Crab, Callinectes sapidus, Retention Rates in Different Trap Meshes.
Effect of a Terrapin Excluder Device on Blue Crab, Callinectes sapidus, Trap Catches.
NMFS Cooperative Shark Tagging Program, 1962-93: An Atlas of Shark Tag and Recapture Data.
Review of a Small-scale Pelagic Longline Fishery off Northeastern Brazil.
Bottlenose Dolphins, Tursiops truncatus, Removing By-catch from Prawn-trawl Codends, During ...
Declining Rockfish Lengths in the Monterey Bay, California, Recreational Fishery, 1959-94.
Mortality of Lingcod, Ophiodon elongatus, Related to Capture by Hook and Line.
The heart of microsurgery.
The engineer behind Calder's art.
Oil sand kicks into high gear.
Racing from the great White North.
Faster to market.
ASME annual report.
New products.
A cradle for new steel technologies.
Pushing the design envelope with CAE.
Risk-based analysis tools.
Two-way brush seals catch a wave.
The 1997-98 ASME fellows...
New products.
Bringing launch costs down to earth.
Combating heart disease with FEA.
PDM moves to the mainstream.
Keeping virtual products on track.
Preserving Earth's stratosphere.
Choosing the right refrigerant.
Natural refrigerants.
New products.
Making gas turbines safer.
Sensing the torque in a robot's joints.
A tale of two CAD systems.
Terror in Black and White.
Spirit of the Tundra.
Trouble at Timberline.
On the Way to Chesapeake Bay.
Above all, do no harm.
A breeding congress.
Truth and rumor on the organ trail.
A dinosaur for the mantel.
Twin Peaks.
Certain uncertainties.
Wings over Spain.
Sizing up the competition.
Field guide.
Space.
Wild and wilder.
Cosmic ray showers provide strong evidence of neutrino flavor oscillation.
Strings may tie quantum gravity to quantum chromodynamics.
Berlin-Heidelberg group reports phase transition in glass at millikelvins in presence of...
The revealing role of pressure in the condensed matter sciences.
A surface view of etching.
Self-trapping of optical beams: Spatial solitons.
Budget Surplus and Congressional Boosters Help Raise Research Funding for Fiscal 1999.
New Products.
At Long Last, a Bose-Einstein Condensate is Formed in Hydrogen.
Giant Air Shower Array Shows Cosmic-Ray Spectrum Violating Greisen Cutoff.
The Global Electric Circuit.
Advanced Techniques in Physical Forensic Science.
New Magnetic Superconductors: A Toy Box for Solid-State Physicists.
New Products.
Search at SLAC finds no millicharged particles.
Rubbing and scrubbing.
The Sokal hoax: At whom are we laughing?
Everyone's magnetism.
British science gets big budget boost.
New products.
PSA's 60th international conference of photography in Orlando.
Back roads of the Maritime Provinces.
Painting with light.
The magnificent mantis. (cover story)
Celebrity stereo cards.
1997 executive committee slate.
Secretary's report.
Cha Cha 3D.
Expansion results in Fiesta Island Replacement Program.
Automation online: Using the Internet for control and...
New pump station brings much needed water to `sin city.'
Technology products.
Plant upgrade reduces trihalomethane formation, increases...
Controlled aerobic digestion of thickened sludge...
Technology focus.
Analyzing underground water-pipe breaks in residual soils.
Mother nature precipitates a partnership on Guam.
Phosphorus inactivation in wastewater treatment...
Computer simulation helps reduce pressure loss.
Sewer infractructure management: New concepts and tools...
Lead-based paint removal presents challenges.
Creating safer work and community environments...
Technology focus.
Sturgeon Bay adopts biosolids beneficial reuse strategy.
Polymer cost and performance evaluation.
Achieving good data management.
Surface care for water storage tanks: Above the waterline.
Los Vaqueros project: Blending consistent water quality...
Digestion process stands up to extreme cold and Rule 503...
Planning for the unthinkable: Process safety and risk...
Technology focus.
Reconstruction of badly blocked sewer avoided with cleaning.
Optimizing your industrial wastestream costs.
Technology focus.
Ozonation system tested in anticipation of disinfection by...
New techniques for wastewater and sludge treatment in...
Specialized motor controller manages pump surges during ...
Technology focus.
Generating chlorine dioxide gas: Chlorate vs. chlorite.
Automated system ensures compliance at Racine Municipal Wastewater Plant.
Alternative technology filtration plant based on California Health Department regulations.
Selection criteria for wastewater pumps.
Protecting concrete tanks in water and wastewater treatment plants.
Decision Making in Middle School Social Studies: An Imperative for Youth and Democracy.
Building Community with Young Adolescents: Practical Economics for the Middle School Classroom.
Ten Ways to Integrate Technology into Middle School Social Studies.
The importance of being first: Unique characteristics of first generation community college students.
Editor's choice: Lessons on disability and the rights of students.
Interviewing to hire competent community college faculty.
Faculty evaluation: A response to competing values.
Home Is Where the Heart Is.
Teacher Education as it Relates to National Accreditation and State Approval.
Helping Children Learn to Read: A Program That Is Making the Grade.
Comparing the Challenges Facing Education Between the United States and Cuba.
Social Development and the Curriculum.
Principals Educate Beginning Teachers About the Law.
Is Scholarship the Moral Debasement of Education?
Race and Children: The Dynamics of Early Socialization.
Counseling Asian Americans: Implications for Training.
A School Parent Group Which Supports Families, Education and Community.
In Search of Equity for Arab-American Students in Public Schools of the United States.
Vocabulary Enrichment in Composition: A Grade Six Study.
Psychometric Benefits of Soft-Linked Scoring Algorithms in Achievement Testing.
Reflecting of a Personal Visit With Dr. Viktor Frankl and His Wife Elly.
Assessing Student Performance: A Descriptive Study of the Classroom Assessment Practices of Ohio Teachers.
Educational Leadership Must Move Beyond Management Training to Visionary and Moral Transformational Leaders.
Implementing Portfolio Assessment in the Development of School Administrators: Improving Preparation for Educational Leadership.
Endorsement of Family Issues in Curriculum Offerings of Teacher Training Programs Nationwide.
Moving School Administrators Into the Computer Age.
Supervising the Intern in the Public Schools.
The Implementation of an Office of International Affairs: A Case Study.
Constructivist Principles of Learning and Teaching Methods.
Student Feedback: A Tool for Improving Instruction in Graduate Education.
Gender Disparity Between the Attitude of Senior Secondary School Students Towards Juvenile Delinquency in Botswana.
Examining the Actual Duties of Resource Teachers.
Editorial Imperative Where 'Collective Will' Via Electric Libraries and Money Reigns.
Building Collaborative Relationships Instructional Improvement.
How to Avoid Common Problems and Misunderstandings of the MCTM Standards.
Measuring principals' openness to change on three dimensions: Affective, cognitive and behavioral.
Video imagery and children's acquisition of televised geographic information: Affecting more than...
A comparison of pedagogical approaches to teaching graduate students in educational administration.
Perceived instrumentality and academics: The link to task valuing.
Survey of psychodramatists' opinions: Issues facing the profession for the new millennium.
Stressors and coping strategies of ESL teachers.
The pupil in the rural school.
Oral-questioning skills of novice teachers: ...Any questions?
A survey of opinions of North Carolina school administrators regarding factors considered...
End-user training: A meta model.
Organizing for instruction in mathematics.
Fostering critical thinking in personality psychology: The trait paper assignment.
The information and picture completion dyad of the WISC-III as a screening test for gifted...
Perceptions of education majors and experienced teachers regarding factors that contribute to...
A psychotherapy assessment battery based on outcomes as opposed to efficacy.
Change in a pre-teacher education group for democratic maturity during college and graduate education.
Who should select objectives?
Innovative curricula: Involving the community in novel ways.
Differences among cognitive-processing styles groups on personality traits.
Perceived stress reported by fisheries graduate students at Tennessee Technological University.
A review of research on environmental print.
Co-occurrence of attention-deficit disorder and learning disability: An overview of research.
Student evaluations of university teaching.
Learning disabled students: Using process writing to build autonomy and self esteem.
Training in personnel selection assessment: Survey of graduate I/O programs.
School readiness: The need for a paradigm shift.
Introduction to the Mini-Series: Assessment and treatment of children with autism in the schools.
Effective assessment of the shared and unique characteristics of children with autism.
A selective review of treatments for children with autism: Description and methodological considerations.
Pivotal teaching interactions for children with autism.
Curriculum for Students with Autism.
Increasing treatment fidelity by matching interventions to contextual variables within the educational setting.
Transferring stimulus control via momentum to increase compliance in a student with autism: A demonstration of collaborative consultation.
Exceptional LD profile types for the WISC-III and WIAT.
Definition x treatment interactions for students with learning disabilities.
Monitoring student progress toward the development of reading competence: A review of three forms of classroom-based assessment.
MAKING BETTER "SCENTS" IN ANTHROPOLOGY: AROMA IN TUAREG SOCIOCULTURAL SYSTEMS AND THE SHAPING OF ETHNOGRAPHY.
IMAGINING A NATION IN KWANGA VILLAGE COURTS, EAST SEPIK PROVINCE, PAPUA NEW GUINEA.
MODERN IDENTITIES AND THE CREATION OF HISTORY: STORIES OF RESCUE AMONG THE JEWS OF DENMARK.
TAKING THE NATIONAL FAMILY TO THE MOVIES: CHANGING FRAMEWORKS FOR THE FORMATION OF DANISH IDENTITY, 1930-1990.
FIELDWORK AND THE PHONE.
TRADITIONAL HEALERS IN THE NIGERIAN HEALTH CARE DELIVERY SYSTEM AND THE DEBATE OVER INTEGRATING TRADITIONAL AND SCIENTIFIC MEDICINE.
SURVIVAL OF THE BIGGEST: BUSINESS POLICY, MANAGERIAL DISCOURSE, AND UNCERTAINTY IN A GLOBAL BUSINESS ALLIANCE.
LANDSCAPE, GENDER, AND COMMUNITY: ANDEAN MOUNTAIN STORIES.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
REFLECTIONS ON HUMAN ACTION AFTER 50 YEARS.
MISES AND HIS UNDERSTANDING OF THE CAPITALIST SYSTEM.
INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION AND HUMAN ACTION.
LUDWIG VON MISES AND THE CASE FOR GOLD.
F.A. HAYEK, ON THE OCCASION OF THE CENTENARY OF HIS BIRTH.
HAYEK'S LIBERAL LEGACY.
THE UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF REGULATING ADDICTIVE SUBSTANCES.
POLITICAL INFLUENCE AND THE INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE.
WOMEN'S ATHLETICS AND THE ELIMINATION OF MEN'S SPORTS PROGRAMS: A REEVALUATION.
Is There a Need for an International Lender of Last Resort?
Rent Seeking and Economic Growth Evidence from the States.
Fuel Economy Rebound Effect for U.S. Household Vehicles.
Productivity Trends in India's Energy Intensive Industries.
Why Has the Energy-Output Ratio Fallen in China?
Energy Intensity and Carbon Emmission Responses to Technological Change: The U.S. Outlook.
TOLAI SORCERY AND CHANGE.
CAJUN MARDI GRAS: CULTURAL OBJECTIFICATION AND SYMBOLIC APPROPRIATION IN A FRENCH TRADITION.
STREET TACTICS: CATHOLIC RITUAL AND THE SENSES OF THE PAST IN CENTRAL SARDINIA.
CARNIVAL ON THE CLIPBOARD: AN ETHNOLOGICAL STUDY OF NEW ORLEANS MARDI GRAS.
KIMONO AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF GENDERED AND CULTURAL IDENTITIES.
WARFARE, POLITICAL LEADERSHIP, AND STATE FORMATION: THE CASE OF THE ZULU KINGDOM, 1808-1879.
Keeping Kosher: Eating and Social Identity Among the Jews of Denmark.
Yam Cycles and Timeless Time in Melanesia.
Violence, Ritual, and Reproduction: Culture and Context in Surma Dueling.
Social Spaces and the Micropolitics of Differentiation: An Example form Northwestern Turkey.
Is It Practical to Search for Meaning?
Transcendence in Later Life.
A Philosophical Time of Life.
Thoughts on the Meaning of Frailty.
The Sustaining Power of Meaning.
The Personals: Oscar-Winning Documentary Looks at Later Life.
Aging into the Spirit: From Traditional Wisdom to Innovative Programs and Communities.
SUSTAINING THE STEPPES: A GEOGRAPHICAL HISTORY OF PASTORAL LAND USE IN MONGOLIA[*].
SETTIN' THE WOODS ON FIRE: RURAL INCENDIARISM AS PROTEST.
LOCAL PEOPLE AND CONSERVATION IN MEXICO'S EL VIZCAINO BIOSPHERE RESERVE.
ENVIRONMENTALISM AND EUROCENTRISM.
REGIONAL IDEAS AND THE MONTANA-ALBERTA BORDERLANDS.
THE BUFFALO COMMONS: METAPHOR AS METHOD.
WRITING THE MIDWEST: HISTORY, LITERATURE, AND REGIONAL IDENTITY.
BEYOND TWISTER: A GEOGRAPHY OF RECREATIONAL STORM CHASING ON THE SOUTHERN PLAINS[*].
A PLACE UNBECOMING: THE COFFEE FARM OF NORTHERN LATIN AMERICA[*].
THE GEOGRAPHY OF JAMES E. VANCE JR. (1925-1999).
Sexual Science in the 21st Century: Where Are We Going? A Personal Note.
Sexual Messages on Television: Comparing Findings From Three Studies.
The Soaps: Their Sex, Gratifications, and Outcomes.
By the Semi-Mystical Appearance of a Condom: How Young Women and Men Communicate Sexual Consent in Heterosexual Situations.
Completion of Self-Administered Questionnaires in a Sex Survey.
Teenage Sexuality and Media Practice: Factoring in the Influences of Family, Friends, and School (Book).
Power, Gender, and Sexual Behavior.
Sex Differences in How Heterosexuals Think About Lesbians and Gay Men: Evidence From Survey Context Effects.
Does the Sexual Double Standard Still Exist? Perceptions of University Women.
Attributions of Victim Responsibility, Pleasure, and Trauma in Male Rape.
The Use of Couple Data to Determine the Reliability of Self-Reported Sexual Behavior.
The Relation Between Early Abuse and Adult Sexuality.
A Longitudinal Examination of the Consequences of Sexual Victimization for Rural Young Adult Women.
Enlightenment Anti-Imperialism.
Can Cultures be Judged? Two Defenses of Cultural Pluralism in Isaiah Berlin's Work.
Liberty and Pluralism in Pursuit of the Non-Ideal.
Negative Freedom and Cultural Belonging: An Unhealthy Tension in the Political Philosophy of Isaiah Berlin.
Isaiah Berlin's Modernity.
Putting Injustice First: An Alternative Approach to Liberal Pluralism.
Of Choice.
Fraternal, But Not Always Sisterly Twins: Negativity and Positivity in Liberal Theory.
Setting One's Heart on Honesty: The Tensions of Liberalism and Religion.
Liberal Toleration.
Individuality, Nationality, and the Jewish Question.
Morality, Social Policy and Berlin's Two Concepts.
Endorsement of Masculine and Feminine Gender Roles: Differences Between Participation In and...
Behavioral Assessment in Sport Psychology Consulting: Applications to Swimming and...
Can Individualists Find Satisfaction Participating In Interactive Team Sports?
Sources of Stress, Burnout, and Intention to Terminate Among Basketball Referees.
Children's Perceptions of Parent Sport Involvement: It's Not How Much, But to What Degree That's...
The Use of Psychological Skills by Female Collegiate Swimmers.
Perceptions of Momentum in College and High School Basketball: An Exploratory Case Study Investigat.
Comparative Concurrent Validity of the MRF-L and ARS Competitive State Anxiety Rating Scales for Vo.
Toward a Theory of Sport.
Gender Effects in the Evaluation of High School Basketball Officials.
Parents Children's Socializing Agents in Youth Soccer.
Sport Participation: Differences in Motivation and Actual.
Team Quality and the Home Advantage.
'To Sing Out the Future of Our Beloved Fatherland' Choral Nationalism and The Polish Singers Alliance of America, 1889-1939. (cover story)
The Rise of Recorded Tejano Music in the Post-World War II Years, 1946-1964.
A Transatlantic Reform: Boston's Port Protection Program and Irish Women Immigrants.
The Real Indians, Who Constitute the Real Tribe: Class, Ethnicity, and IRA Politics on the Blackfeet Reservation. (cover story)
New Growth on Old Vines The State of the Field: The Social History of Immigration to and Ethnicity in the United States.
Race, Nation, and Culture in Recent Immigration Studies.
Immigrants and Immigration Law: A State of the Field Assessment.
Comment: We Study the Present to Understand the Past.
Comment: Ins and Outs: Who is an Immigration Historian?
Comment: Searching for Perspectives: Race, Law, and the Immigrant Experience.
Lumbee kinship, community, and the success of the red banks mutual association.
Upland Yuman (Yavapai and Pai) Leadership across the Nineteenth Century.
Pai Cultural Change.
Lisandro Mendez's `Coyote and Deer': On Reciprocity, Narrative Structures, and Interactions.
The Origins of Soul Food in Black Urban Identity: Chicago, 1915-1947.
The Proctor Interlude in St. Joseph and in America: Astronomy, Romance and Tragedy.
The Comparative Development of Newspapers in New Zealand and the United States in the Nineteenth Century.
Roundtable: The Imagined Community of International American Studies.
Coming into View: European Re-Visions of 'America' after 1945.
The Thoreau Centenary in Britain.
All But "A Black Skin and Wooly Hair": Frederick Douglass's Witness of the Irish Famine.
...American? Studies: A Dialogue Across the Americas.
`Still Longing for de Old Plantation': The Visual Parodies and Racial National Imaginary...
Changes in Mexican and United States Migration Policy: A New Era of Serious Dialogue?
Pan-American (Re)Visions: Magical Realism and Amerindian Cultures in Susan Power's The Grass...
The New Dollar Diplomacy in Latin America.
Islamists, the State, and Cooperation in Jordan.
Into the New Millennium: Challenges Facing Palestinian Higher Education in the Twenty-First Century.
Clash of Politics or Civilizations? Sectarianism Among Youth in Lebanon.
Contrary Views of Economic Diplomacy in the Arab World: Egypt.
Egypt in the Time and Space of Globalism.
Marginalized Violent Internal Conflict in the Age of Globalization: Mexico and Egypt.
Globalization: Trade and Investment in Egypt, Jordan and Syria Since 1980.
First World, Third World, Globalizing World: Where is the Middle East?
Globalization and Cross-Cultural Values: The Politics of Identity and Judgment.
Developmental Stalemate in the Eastern Mediterranean: Some Conceptual Tools for the Understanding...
Globalization and the Arab World in Middle East Politics: Regional Dynamics in ...
The State, Participation, and Constitutionalism: Political Crises and Democracy...
The Ideological and Political Impact of U.S. Fulbrighters on Chinese Students:...
A Sino-American Cultural Exchange during the Bombing Crisis: A Personal Experience.
The Post-1997 Hong Kong Press: How Free and for How Long?
Has the Chinese Focus on Hong Kong Led to the Neglect of Macau?
The U.S. `All-Out Engagement' China Policy and Its Implications for Beijing and Taipei.
Hong Kong and Taiwan: Two Case Studies in Open and Distance Learning.
Censorship in the Japanese News Media: A Survey Report.
Relations between the Chinese Mainland and Taiwan: Overview and Chronology.
Document 1: PRC White Paper, `The Taiwan Question and Reunification of China,' 31 August 1993.
Document 2: ROC White Paper, `Relations across the Taiwan Strait' (Concluding Statements), 5 July...
Document 5: MAC Chairman Chang King-yuh, `Cross-Strait Relations and Their Prospects...
Document 8: MAC Chairman Chang King-yuh, `The Mainland Visit by SEF Chairman Koo Chen-fu...
Neutralization: An All-Weather Paradigm for Korean Reunification.
What We Know about Party Nonidentifiers in South Korea.
Trilateral Economic Relations among Taiwan, China, and the United States.
The (Not So) Long March? China's Pace of Change.
What Sanctions Epidemic?
Loyal to a Fault?
Squandering Triumph.
The Rollback Fantasy.
Defense's Death Spiral.
From EMU to AMU?
Colombia on the Brink.
Redefining the National Interest.
Give War a Chance.
The Fallout from Kosovo.
The Balkans' Lethal Nationalisms.
Limited Engagement.
Security Lessons from the Cold War.
Mexico's Coming Backlash.
Bank on Democracy.
Dreams of the Eurasian Heartland.
Painting China Green.
America and Europe: Clash of the Titans.
The Lonely Superpower.
Bully of the Free World.
The Colonel in His Labyrinth.
Lessons for the Next Financial Crisis.
A Self-Help Guide for Emerging Markets.
Dealing with the Bomb in South Asia.
Public Opinion and the Future of U.S.-Panama Relations.
Associations and Activism: Mobilization of Urban Informal Workers in Costa Rica and Nicaragua.
Economic Policy in Chile's New Democracy.
Toward a New Agenda for the Study of Religion in the Americas.
Churches as Winners and Losers in the Network Society.
No Land of Milk and Honey: Women CEB Activists in Posttransition Brazil.
Religious and Social Participation in War-Torn Areas of El Salvador.
Believers and Neighbors: `Huaycan Is One and No One Shall Divide It.'.
Rethinking Transnationalism: Reconstructing National Identities Among Peruvian Catholics in...
Popular Religions and the Building of Democracy in Latin America: Saving the Tocquevillian Parallel.
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF AGRICULTURAL POLICY IN BRAZIL: Decision Making and Influence from 1964 to 1992[*].
MILITARY JUSTICE IN THE STATE OF PERNAMBUCO AFTER THE BRAZILIAN MILITARY REGIME: An Authoritarian Legacy[*].
The Privatization of Social Security and Women's Welfare: Gender Effects of the Chilean Reform.
Myths of Racial Democracy: Cuba, 1900-1912.
The Strengths and Limits of the NGO Women's Movement Model: Shaping Nicaragua's Democratic Institut.
Civil Society in a Postwar Period: Labor in the Salvadoran Democratic Transition.
Historical Archives of the Republic of Panama.
Using Online Primary Sources with Students.
A Sample Lesson in Economics for Primary Students.
Computer-Mediated Communication in a High School Global Education Curriculum: A Brochure Project.
Nuclear Reactions: Studying Peaceful Applications in the Middle and Secondary School.
Using a Social Studies Theme to Conceptualize a Problem.
Journey Boxes: Telling the Story of Place, Time, and Culture with Photographs, Literature, and Artifacts.
Multicultural Picture Books: Perspectives from Canada.
Democratic Citizenship Education in Albania.
Democratic Citizenship Education in Korea.
History Comes Alive in the Classroom.
Challenging Exhibitions.
Rediscovered Treasures.
Luluwa Masks.
The Mocko Jumbie of the U.S. Virgin Islands History and Antecedents.
Early-Nineteenth-Century Chiefs' Horns from Coastal Liberia.
African Art and the Internet.
Chokwe!
Interpreting Projections, Projecting Interpretations.
Bicycle Decoration and Everyday Aesthetics in Northern Nigeria.
African Art from the Bareiss Collection.
Communique From Afro-Atlantis.
African Art at the Art Institute of Chicago.
The Sculpture of Ousmane Sow.
Bushman(ia) and Photographic Intervention.
Eternal Potential Chromolithographs in Vodunland.
Max Esser's `Bakundu Fetishes.'.
Time in Space: Narrative in Classical Art.
Sealing Signs and the Art of Transcribing in the Vierzon Cartulary.
Imagined Pilgrimage in the Itinerary Maps of Matthew Paris.
Truth and Bizzarria in an Engraving of Lo stregozzo.
Exemplum and Imitatio: Countess Matilda and Lucrezia Pico della Mirandola...
Time, Distance, Focus, Excellence.
Introduction to the Symposium on the NAEP 1997 Arts Report Card.
The National Assessment in the Visual Arts.
Rendering unto Caesar That Which Is Caesar's: A Critique of the NAEP in Theatre.
NAEP and Dance: On Contextual Data, Process, and Problems in Dance Assessments, and Recommendations for the Field.
The 1997 Assessment in Music: Red Flags in the Sunset.
For You Dear--Anything! Remembering and Returning to First Principles--Part 2.
Adversaries, Advocates, or Thoughtful Analysts? Some Lessons from Dance History.
Spinning the Arts NAEP.
Dance Education 199: Status, Challenges, and Recommendations.
Paul Max Lloyd. (cover story)
Tributes.
Rhetorical Appropriation: Lope's New World Play and Canonicity. (cover story)
Maria de Zayas and Ana Caro: The Space of Woman's Solidarity in the Spanish Golden Age. (cover story)
The Rhetoric of Jealousy: Dom Casmurro.
Money in Brazilian Popular Music.
The Cultural Economy of the Bahian Carnaval.
Crafting Culture: Selling and Contesting Authenticity in Puerto Rico's Informal Economy.
Ideas for effective Web-based instruction.
'... That Is the Question?'.
MENC today.
Developing teachers for early childhood programs.
Musical play and young children.
Child-centered learning and music programs.
Stravinsky's Firebird and young children.
Facing the risks of the 'Mozart effect'.
Idea bank.
Menc Today.
Arranging World music for instrumentalists.
Creating an opera with seventh graders.
Motivation in the Choral Rehearsal.
Teacher Control and Creativity.
MENC Today.
Duke Ellington the man and his music.
Teaching audiation in instrumental classes.
Writing rubrics for the music classroom.
Popular music and the instrumental ensemble.
Teaching music the leadership component.
Partners for success.
MENC today.
An aural approach to improvisation.
Changing voices, changing times.
Internet resources for general music.
The Gibbs Street connection.
A challenge for change in music education.
Best self forward.
MENC today.
Music assessment concepts.
Beginning assessment in elementary general music.
Assessment in instrumental music.
Assessment and strategic planning.
All about audiation and music aptitudes.
Hollywood Extras: One Tradition of `Avant-Garde' Film in Los Angeles.
Notes on the Images of the Camps.
Documentary Journey to the Land of the Head Shrinkers.
Kawara On Kawara.
Dissociated Objects: The Statements/Sculptures of Lawrence Weiner.
A Conversation with Jean-Louis Cohen.
Off Premises.
Can the Camera See? Mimesis in Man with a Movie Camera.
Hitchcock, or the Pleasures of Metaskepticism.
Moving Still: Mediating Yvonne Rainer's Trio A.
Gardening, History, and the Escape from Time: Derek Jarman's Modern Nature.
`Who decides what is `Hauptstadkultur,' and what is not?
Writing on the Wall.
Catalysts to Disunion.
Strindberg's Early Dramas and Lacan's `Law of the Father'.
The Joyce of Influence.
Le Roi Chevalier.
Infectious Excitement.
Hagar Olsson's Chitambo and the Ambiguities of Female Modernism.
`Haven't You Heard...'.
Imagining an Early Odin.
Finnish-German Submarine Cooperation 1923-35.
`My Own Novel, Yes, Really!'.
Knut Hamsun in Paa gjengrodde stier.
Paul Schach, 1915-1998.
Introduction.
Troping History: Modernist Residue in Fredric Jameson's Pastiche and Linda Hutcheon's Parody.
Is Gerald Graff Machiavellian?
Frank Lentricchia's Critical Confession, or, the Traumas of Teaching Theory.
The New Belletrism.
Flying High and Flying Low: Travel, Sabbaticals, and Privilege in Academic Life.
Erich Auerbach's Mimesis--'Tis Fifty Years Since: A Reassessment.
Paul Valery: Literature as Such.
Introduction: Interactive Style.
Misadventure: Future Fiction and the New Networks.
Re-reading the Desert in Hypertranslation.
Loose Ends/Connections: Interactivity in Networked Space.
Doors to the Labyrinth: Designing Interactive Frictions with Nina Menkes, Pat O'Neill, and John Rechy.
Getting into the Story.
A Catalogue of Selected Rhetorical Devices Used in the Works of Edgar Allan Poe.
The Shoah, The Akeda, and the Conversations in A.B. Yehoshua's Mr. Mani.
Facciones: Fictional Identity and the Face in Borges's `La Forma De La Espada.'.
`Sous Bois Ou Sur L'Herbe,' or the Cyclops' Cave? Ponge, Landscape, Giacometti.
`Smut'janstva V Bukvarjax': `Nadmennyj Niscij' and Narrative ABC's.
Olfaction, Authority, and the Interpretation of History in Salman Rushdie's Midnight's Children, Patrick Suskind's Das Parfum, and Michel Tournier's Le Roi Des Aulnes.
`Zola Fantastique': An Analysis of the Story `La Mort D'Olivier Becaille.'.
The Rhetoric of Exemplarity in Two Spanish Sixteenth-Century Specula Principis.
How the Soviets Solved the Jewish Question: The Il'f-Petrov Novels and Il'f's Jewish Stories.
The Fight Ain't Over. (cover story)
Game Plans for Life.
Mid-Atlantic Drift.
At the FRONT.
A Plague in the Making.
Tangled Up in Ticker Tape.
When Cyber Stalkers Walk.
It's Later Than You Think.
Does Law Mean Never Having to Say You're Sorry?
Banking on Fear.
Reining in the Regulators.
Untrue Confessions.
Endangered AGAIN.
Waiting to Celebrate.
Seeds of hope for Clarkfield.
Sizing Up Sentences. (cover story)
Evolution of a Controversy.
Protecting the Wealth.
Rev Up Your Research Engines.
Laudable Lawyering.
Contributing Through Insurance.
Another Broken Trust.
How Safe is Your 'Burb?
Integrating your Heart and Mind.
The Lawyer Who Wasn't.
Purpose of the Canada/U.S. Law Institute.
Conference opening.
The dimensions of technological change.
Challenges of rapid technological change: Catching up with `the Jetsons'.
People aspects of technological change: Immigration issues, labor mobility, the brain drain, and R&D -- A U.S. perspective.
People aspects of technological change: Immigration issues, labor mobility, the brain drain, and R&D -- a Canadian perspective.
Discussion following the remarks of Dr. Van Erden and Professor DeVoretz.
Technological change in the European union: Key issues including commonality of standards, integration as promoting change, and impact of change on a unified economic grouping.
Discussion following the remarks of Mr. Wainwright.
Protecting and exploiting U.S. and canadian intellectual property abroad in a technologically changing world economy -- a U.S. perspective.
Protecting and exploiting U.S and Canadian intellectual property abroad on a global basis in a technologically changing world -- a Canadian perspective.
Product liability aspects of the risks of technological change -- a Canadian perspective.
Product liability aspects of the risks of technological change -- a U.S. perspective.
The public dimension of technological change: Impact on the media, the citizenry, and governments -- a U.S. perspective[a].
The Public Dimension Of Technological Change: Impact On The Media, The Citizenry, And Governments -- A Canadian Perspective.
The U.S. Institutional Private Capital Market: A Turbo Tour.
Raising Venture Capital Aspects Of Technological Change -- A Canadian Perspective.
Comparative tax aspects of technological change in the Canada/U.S. context: The total tax burden on people and corporations: U.S. vis-a-vis Canada -- a U.S. perspective.
Observations on a presentation given on the comparative tax aspects of technological change in Canada and the United States.
The impact of technological change on developing countries.
Discussion following the remarks of Mr. Biel.
Consumer protection and antitrust enforcement at the speed of light: The FTC meets the internet.
Calibrating the electronic scales: Tipping the balance in favour of a vigorous and competitive electronic market for consumers.
The Role of the Rational and the Emotive in a Theory of Animal Rights.
Sustainable Development and the Domination of Nature: Spreading the Seed of the Western Ideology of Nature.
The Ones That Got Away: Regulating Escaped Fish and Other Pollutants From Salmon Fish Farms.
Super Settlements for Superfund: A New Paradigm for Voluntary Settlement?
Paving the Road to Wetlands Mitigation Banking.
Unsafe Sewage Sludge or Beneficial Biosolids?: Liability, Planning, and Management Issues Regarding.
A New Political Economy of Oil?
The Perils of the Petro-State: Reflections on the Paradox of Plenty.
The Three Gorges Dam and China's Energy Dilemma.
Russian Energy; A Blessing and a Curse.
Energy and the Asian Security Nexus.
Living With Coal: India's Energy Policy in the 21st Century.
La Apertura: The Opening of Venezuela's Oil Industry.
Path Insistence: Comparing European and American Attitudes Toward Energy.
Nuclear Energy Policy in the European Union: Meltdown or False Alarm?
A New Energy Paradigm for the 21st Century.
Energy Suprises for the 21st Century.
The Soft Case for Soft Energy.
Biomass Energy and the Poor in the Developing World.
On the Point of Medieval Political Philosophy.
Strauss's Farabi, Scholarly Prejudice, and Philosophic Politics.
The Emancipation Proclamation, the Declaration of Independence, and the Presidency: Lincoln's Model of Statesmanship.
Liberal Communitarianism as Political Theory.
The Ambivalence of Classic Natural Right: Leo Strauss on Philosophy, Morality, and Statesmanship.
Restoring Legitimacy to Public Authority in Twentieth-Century Africa.
Montaigne's Conception of the Self: A Non-Rights Basis for Toleration.
Art and Liberalism in Hitchcock's Rear Window.
Aliens, the Cosmos, and the Foundations of Political Life.
Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart as a Case Study in Nietzsche's Transvaluation of Values.
`Poised between Savagery and Civilization': Forging Political Communities in Ford's Westerns.
The Textualist Jurisprudence of Justice Scalia.
Scalia Contra Common Law Adjudication.
The Smoke of a Burning White Flag: Law without a Regime, Form without Purpose.
In re Antonin Scalia.
The Cold War Revisionists Kayoed.
A `China Threat'?
The Evolution of U.S. Images of China.
Relating to China.
The Efficacy of International Criminal Justice.
Learning to Eat Soup with a Knife(n1).
Indo-Russian Military Technical Cooperation: Implications for Southern Asia.
The Death of the Great International Systems Debate?
Promoting Peace and Democracy in the Aftermath of the Balkan Wars.
Traditions and Interests: American Belief Systems, American Policy, and the Bosnian War.
NATO and Russia, Russians and NATO.
Clinton, Korea, and Presidential Diplomacy.
Surgical excision of pilomatrixoma of the head and neck: A retrospective review of 26 cases.
RinoFlow Nasal Wash and Sinus System as a mechanism to deliver medications to the paranasal...
Equilibrium and balance in the elderly.
Giant ameloblastoma: Report of an extreme case and a description of its treatment.
The impact of comorbidity and age on survival with laryngeal cancer.
Nasal mucociliary clearance and nasal and oral pH in patients with insulin-dependent diabetes.
Use of a new device, the MicroWick..., to deliver medication to the inner ear.
Antileukotriene therapy for the relief ofsinus symptoms in aspirin triad disease.
Tonsil and adenoid surgery for upper airway obstruction in children.
Subglottic carcinoma: Review of a series and characterization of its patterns of spread.
Safety of endoscopic sinus surgery in a residency training program.
Clinical impact of sonographically guided biopsy of salivary gland masses and surrounding...
Surgical complications of cochlear implantation: A report of three cases and their...
Outcomes after laser stapedotomy with and without preservation of the stapedius tendon.
Investigation of endolymphatic hydrops by electrocochleography in patients with...
Xerostomia: A prevalent condition in the elderly.
The value of computer-aided (image-guided) systems for endoscopic sinus surgery.
Overview of phase I surgery for obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.
Operative techniques of uvulopalatopharyngoplasty.
Overview of phase II surgery for obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.
Insurance coding for the diagnosis and treatment of obstructive sleep disorders.
Snoring surgery: Which one is best for you?
The use of ENT-prescribed home sleep studies for patients with suspected obstructive sleep apnea.
Thyroid testing and thyroid hormone replacement in patients with sleep disordered breathing.
An overview of nasal CPAP therapy in the management of obstructive sleep apnea.
Predicting which patients will benefit from surgery for obstructive sleep apnea: The ENT exam.
Implications of Social Development Research for School-Based Interventions for Aggressive Youth with EBD.
Relationship Between Childhood Peer Rejection and Aggression and Adolescent Delinquency Severity and Type Among African American Youth.
Social Networks and Configurations in Inner-City Schools: Aggression, Popularity, and Implications for Students with EBD.
A Social Goals Perspective on Children's Social Competence.
Proactive and Reactive Aggression and Boys' Friendship Quality in Mainstream Classrooms.
Prevention Strategies for At-Risk Students and Students with EBD in Urban Elementary Schools.
Comments on Social Development Research in EBD.
Analyzing the classroom social behavior of students with EBD.
Youth violence: Psychosocial risk factors, treatment, prevention, and recommendations.
Young students at risk for antisocial behavior: The utility of academic and social skills interventions.
The achieving, behaving, caring project for preventing ED: two-year outcomes.
Behavioral and emotional problems among Jamaican and African American children, ages 6 to 11: Teacher reports versus direct observations.
Beyond Regulatory Compliance.
Risk Management and Quality Improvement: Together At Last--Part 1.
Face-off with Death: Developing Educational Programs for Dealing with Death.
Excess mortality of unemployed men and women during a period of rapidly increasing unemployment.
Increased fetal loss in women with heritable thrombophilia.
Post-malaria neurological syndrome.
Alcohol and drug use in UK university students.
Cell-mediated immune response to beta casein in recent-onset insulin-dependent diabetes;...
The changing epidemiology of acquired drug-resistant tuberculosis in San Francisco, USA.
HIV vaccines: Where we are and where we are going.
Pathophysiology of itching.
Evidence in consultations: Interpreted and individualised.
Risk of venous thromboembolism in users of hormone replacement therapy.
Risk of hospital admission for idiopathic venous thromboembolism among users of postmenopausal...
Prospective study of exogenous hormones and risk of pulmonary embolism in women.
HIV incidence among injecting drug users in New York City syringe-exchange programmes.
Randomised study of cognitive effects of iron supplementation in non-anaemic iron-deficient...
Breast-duct endoscopy to study stages of cancerous breast disease.
United States of America.
Low-efficacy HIV vaccines: Potential for community-based intervention programmes.
Epidermoid anal cancer: Results from the UKCCCR randomised trial of radiotherapy alone versus...
Effect of anaemia and cardiovascular disease on surgical mortality and morbidity.
Effects of maternal smoking during pregnancy and a family history of asthma on respiratory...
Production of antiendomysial antibodies after in-vitro gliadin challenge of small intestine...
Prevention of HIV infection in developing countries.
The rise of western medicine in India.
Randomised comparison of leucocyte-depleted versus buffy-coat-poor blood transfusion and...
Prosthetic loading during kneeling of persons with transfemoral amputation.
Effects of age and functional limitation on leg joint power and work during stance...
Gait characteristics of individuals with multiple sclerosis before and after a 6-month...
Temperature effects on surface pressure-induced changes in rat skin perfusion:...
Transcutaneous oxygen tension in subjects with tetraplegia with and without pressure ulcers:...
Symposium: What Is Higher Education's Responsibility to Society?
Plain Pointed Shoes and the Higher Good.
Education as Metier: Finding the Fabulous in the Universal.
The Public Value of the Liberal Arts.
Politics and the Humanities.
Toward the Enjoyment of Teaching.
Straight History.
The Remediation War at the City University of New York.
Enemies of Promise: Why America Needs the SAT.
Surplus Theory in the Cultures Market.
Cultural Studies in the Light of Frank Sinatra.
The Philosophy of the Faculty.
Revising the Museum.
Diminished Masterpieces.
Variations on `P.C.' in the Movies.
A Defense of Popular Culture.
The Corrosive Trivialization of Culture.
The Tyranny of the Near-at-Hand.
The Siegen Affair.
Coolness.
The Return of the Seagoing Cowboy.
Going Up to Oxford.
My Father and the Weak-Eyed Devils.
My Faulkner.
You're an Egg.
Audubon and the Veiled Lady.
Practice Without Principle.
Immanuel's Ground.
An Anatomy of Promising.
Proust's Turn from Nostalgia.
What We Talk About When We Talk About Culture.
Guggenheim in Bilbao.
A Rationale of Collecting.
`The Secret of the Soul': Eugene O'Neill's The Iceman Cometh.
Before Another Tribunal: The Idea of the `Nonspecialist Public'.
`The Pinch of Destiny': Religion as Experience, Meaning, Identity, Power.
Darwin Turning the Worm.
State Power and the Regulation of Islam in Jordan.
A Theology of the State from the Baha'i Teachings.
The Holocaust and the Christians.
`To Avoid a New Kulturkampf': The Catholic Workers' Associations and National...
The Politics of Regulating Religion in Mexico: The 1992 Constitutional Reforms in...
Who Is A Jew? The American Jewish Community in Conflict With Israel.
Church elites and the restoration of civil society in the communist societies of central Europe.
Local laws restricting religion in Russia: Precursors of Russia's new national law.
Notes on Church-State Affairs: United States.
Religious Diversity: Some Implications for Monotheism.
`The Visitation of the Stranger': On Some Mystical Dimensions of the History of Religions.
Economic Sanctions, Just War Doctrine, and the `Fearful Spectacle of the Civilian Dead.'.
The Path of Emptiness.
Monica, Bill, and Ethics.
Can Buddhism Save? Finding Resonance in Incommensurability.
How any person on the street can help a street person...
Compassion as a means to Freedom.
The Educational Crisis at Home.
A New Economy for a New Century.
Why People Believe in God.
A Global Status Report: January 1, 2050.
The Trouble with Tolerance.
Conspiracy Theory?
Cairo Plus Five - and How It Almost Failed.
Is the World Poised for the Humanistic Century?
The Immorality of the Ten Commandments.
Lessons Learned.
There they go again!
How BIOTECHNOLOGY is transforming WHAT we believe and how we LIVE.
The Two Hypotheses of HUMAN MEANING.
The new nationalisms.
Liberal egalitarianism and the case for supporting national cultures[*].
On redefining the nation.
Anomalous experience in everyday life: Its significance for psychopathology.
Delusions.
Delusional Misidentification as Subpersonal Disintegration.
Schizophrenia, the space of reasons, and thinking as a motor process[*].
Hallucinations emerge from an imbalance of self-monitoring and reality modelling.
Multiplex vs. multiple selves: Distinguishing dissociative disorders.
Malfunction and mental illness.
Walking Home Together.
The Genocide of Native Americans.
The Shadows of War and the Vietnamese in the United States.
Breaking the Silence.
The Shape of the Shadow.
Seeing in the Dark.
The Goddess in Wales.
Cherry Blossoms.
Varroa-Tolerant Bees Keep Hives Buzzing.
On Barley-A Rust of Another Stripe.
Farmland Studies for the Long Haul.
Can Foods Forestall Aging?
Protecting the Chesapeake Bay.
The BLUETONGUE Triangle.
Remote Sensing Keeps an Eye on Natural Resources.
Banishing Tarnished Plant Bugs From Cotton.
Mississippi Delta MSEA.
Minimizing Microbes on Fresh-Cut Foods.
Saving Grapes.
Fighting Fusarium.
Making Harvests More Nutritious.
Attracting & Tracking an Intractable Pest.
Baking Sure New Wheats Measure Up.
Allergic to Rubber?
A Unified Theory Of Civil-Military Relations.
Black American Radicalism and the First World War: The Secret Files of the Military Intelligence Division.
The Western Ethical Tradition and the Morality of the Warrior.
Why Don't They Fight Each Other? Cultural Diversity and Operational Unity in Multinational Forces.
Professional Soldiers and Politics: A Case of Central and Eastern Europe.
Adjusting to the Post-U.S. Bases Era: The Ordeal of the Philippine Military's Modernization Program.
War and Culture: A Neglected Relation.
Samuel Huntington and Communist Civil-Military Relations.
Contact Lenses: Explaining U.S.-Russian Military-to-Military Ties.
Changes in Patterns of Sexual Harassment in the U.S. Military: A Comparison of the 1988 and 1995 DoD Surveys.
The Impact of Family Supportive Policies and Practices on Organizational Commitment to the Army.
BioCycle World.
Regional Roundup.
Compost Plays Role in Riverfront Restoration.
Food Residuals Composting in the U.S.
An Amazing 93 Percent Reuse for Biosolids.
Learning the Compost Business ... In Prison.
BioCycle World.
Regional Roundup.
Going Bulk for Yard Trimmings Collection.
How Woody Residuals Are Recycled in the United States.
Producers Expand Line of Mulch Products.
National Biosolids Overview.
Sapporo Symposium Reviews Organics Recycling Developments.
BioCycle World.
Regional Roundup.
Analyzing the Potential of Biomass Recovery.
Investing Upfront in a Compost Factory.
Life and Times of an Organics Recycling Company.
MSW Composting in the United States.
Troubleshooting The Compost Pile.
Reducing Pathogen and Vector Attraction for Biosolids.
Achieving Pathogen Stabilization Using Vermicomposting.
BioCycle World.
Regional Roundup.
Solid Waste Agency Conquers a Volume Challenge.
Processing and Recycling Storm Debris.
Wood Grinder Finds Niche in Contract Work.
Backyard Composting Evaluated in New York City.
Satellite Sites Pay Off For Yard Trimmings Composters.
BioCycle World.
Regional Roundup.
Food Residuals Recovery in California.
Climbing the Wall to Boost Recycling Rates.
Minimizing Festival Trash.
Recycling Pays Off at Construction Site.
Executive Order and Proposed Bill Will Boost Biobased Products and Bioenergy.
Collecting, Processing and Financing Yard Trimmings Programs.
AIBS news.
Having Their Toxins and Eating Them Too.
Paternity Battles.
Physical Controls on the Taylor Valley Ecosystem, Antarctica. (cover story)
How Soils Structure Communities in the Antarctic Dry Valleys. (cover story)
Dry Valley Streams in Antarctica: Ecosystems Waiting for Water. (cover story)
Carbon Transformations in a Perennially Ice-Covered Antarctic Lake. (cover story)
Ecological Legacies: Impacts on Ecosystems of the McMurdo Dry Valleys. (cover story)
Pollination Migrates to Top of Conservation Agenda.
Saving the California Condor.
Lessons Learned from a Study of Habitat Conservation Planning.
The Biology of Cloning: History and Rationale.
A Geomorphic-Trophic Model for Landscape Control of Arctic Lake Food Webs. (cover story)
Cooperation among Selfish Individuals in Insect Societies.
Educational Interventions That Improve Environmental Behaviors: A Meta-Analysis'.
Life Paths Into Effective Environmental Action.
A Multivariate Analysis of the Relationship Between Attitude Toward Science and Attitude Toward...
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Residential Environmental Education Programs in...
Hands On or Hands Off? Disgust Sensitivity and Preference for Environmental Education Activities.
Development of the Survey of Environmental Issue Attitudes.
Relationship Between Environmental Knowledge and Environmental Attitude of High School Students.
A Comparison Between Traditional and Constructivist Teaching in Environmental Science.
Pollution-Prevention Information Campaigns for Small Businesses: An Audience Analysis.
Risks From an `Unknown' Technology: How Iowans Perceive Agricultural Sludge.
Writing From a Sense of Place.
Predicting Taiwanese Secondary Teachers' Responsible Environmental Behavior Through Environmental Literacy Variables.
A Role for Ecological Restoration Work in University Environmental Education.
Problems With Environmental Reporting: Perspectives of Daily Newspaper Reporters.
Factors Influencing Children's Environmental Attitudes.
Environmental knowledge, attitudes, and behavior in Dutch secondary education.
Variables associated with American high school students' knowledge of environmental issues related to energy and pollution.
The children's attitudes toward the environment scale for preschool children.
Windows on the future.
Close to home.
Regulating Bt Maize in the United States and Europe.
Civic Environmentalism.
Civic Environmentalism By Any Other Name.
The transformation of the Rocky Mountain Arsenal.
Petroleum and indigenous peoples in Ecuador's Amazon.
Spectrum.
Seeking common ground in Ecuador.
Forest resource scarcity & social conflict in Indonesia.
Assessing the effectiveness of Denmark's waste tax.
Sweden's biomass controversy.
What's to Become of Trade in Hazardous Wastes?
Hazardous Waste Management.
Using Computer Models in International Negotiations.
System performance management for the S/390 Parallel Enterprise Server G5.
The S/390 G5/G6 binodal cache.
Custom S/390 G5 and G6 microprocessors.
Chip integration methodology for the IBM S/390 G5 and G6 custom microprocessors.
The S/390 G5 floating-point unit.
Architecture and software support in IBM S/390 Parallel Enterprise Servers for IEEE Floating-Point arithmetic.
S/390 Parallel Enterprise Server CMOS Cryptographic Coprocessor.
Continuous Online Auditing: A Program of Research.
The Impact of the Euro on Information Systems.
A Comparison of Three Visual Representations of Complex Multidimensional Accounting Information.
Accounting Information Systems Doctoral Dissertations: 1998.
The Research Pyramid: A Framework for Accounting Information Systems Research.
Collective User Participation in Specifying Requirements of an Information System: Minimizing Differences Between Minority and Majority Voting Subgroups.
REAL-D: A Schema for Data Warehouses.
Evaluation of internal control from a control objective narrative.
Homarid Lobster Hatcheries: Their History and Role in Research, Management, and Aquaculture.
An Index of Abundance for Coastal Species of Juvenile Sharks from the Northeast Gulf of Mexico.
Reducing Prawn-trawl Bycatch in Australia: An Overview and an Example from Queensland.
New Products.
Upping the systems.
U-turn for NO[sub x].
Sealed and delivered.
CAD meets CAE.
The molding influence.
Smooth Body.
Advancing the Standard.
News & notes.
Computing.
Technology focus.
Chunky, spunky, and cheap.
More Than Just a Planet, It's a Meal.
What to Do in a Big Lecture Class, Besides Lecture?
Why and How To Observe Binary Stars Tonight.
Life on the Mountain.
Astronomy on the Banks of the Baikal.
How Rare Are Extraterrestial Civilizations and When Did They Emerge?
Traversing the Galactic Darkness: The Interstellar Matters of Extraterrestial Transmissions.
A Biologist's View on Life Out There.
Lurking Between the Galaxies.
The End of Orion.
Nobel Prize to `t Hooft and Veltman for Putting Electroweak Theory on Firmer Foundation.
Nobel Prize Goes to Zewail for Developing Femtochemistry.
A New Way to Guide Light in Optical Fibers.
Nanoscale Fluctuations at Solid Surfaces.
Experimental Studies of Bose-Einstein Condensation.
The Theory of Bose-Einstein Condensation of Dilute Gases.
Budget Brinkmanship Leads to Unexpected Gains in Fiscal 2000 for R&D at NSF, DOD, and DOE.
What Happened to Tokaimura?
Gravitational Self-Energy and the Equivalence Principle.
How We Localize Sound.
The Virtual Cook: Modeling Heat Transfer in the Kitchen.
Composite Materials--Reflections on the First Half Century.
Television Goes Digital.
On Stickiness.
Krebs Steps Down as Science Chief of DOE, Breaking Longevity Record.
Meserve Joins NRC; New Faces at State Department and NSF.
Going for the Gold: First Collisions at RHIC Are Set for December.
Single Microwave Photons Can Be Measured Nondestructively.
Jordan, Pauli, Politics, Brecht, and a Variable Gravitational Constant.
Rediscovering Mars.
Gravitational Radiation and the Validity of General Relativity.
LIGO and the Detection of Gravitational Waves.
Bose Condensates Produce Coherent Nonlinear Behavior.
Lasing Demonstrated in Tiny Cavities Made with Photonic Crystals.
Radiation Risk and Ethics.
Computational Materials Science: The Era of Applied Quantum Mechanics.
Totality and Planning for it.
Hummingbird Attraction & Photographing with Natural Light.
Back Roads of the Maritime Provinces.
Stereo on a Shoestring.
Visual Perception & Beyond.
Monochrome Color Prints from BLACK & WHITE Negatives.
The Nature of Midway Atoll.
The Greek Island Connection.
Welcome to Toronto.
Star with a CSD Photo Essay.
The Wonderful World of Glass Photography.
Photographic Impressionism.
African Memories.
Photo Travel.
Workshop Experiences.
NORTHUMBERLAND--England's Border County.
International News Notes.
Then and Now Stereo Card Sets.
Stereo Tabletop Photography--A Primer.
Insect Photography.
On to Toronto!
International News Notes.
THE PREFERRED METHOD OF Selection in Photoshop.
1998 Who's Who in Photography.
Tested Techniques for Travelogs.
Outstanding Photographs from Youth Photographers II.
A touch of Monet.
Using a `Living Lab' to Engage Students in the Foreign Language Classroom.
Teaching Learners to Think, Read, and Write More Effectively in Content Subjects.
Illuminating the New Standards with Learning Style: Striking a Perfect Match.
The Lack of Ability-Related Explanations in Children from India.
There's Madness in These Methods.
Family and Community Involvement Policies: Teachers Can Lead the Way.
What's Happening in Our Schools?
Taboo Topics: Cultural Restraint on Teaching Social Issues.
EDITORIAL.
PREPARING HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS FOR THE NEW MILLENNIUM AND BEYOND.
THE SENIOR STUDENT HIGH SCHOOL RATING SCALE (SHRS).
THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY: PROMOTING BOARD CERTIFICATION FOR SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGISTS.
THE LEARNER CENTERED HIGH SCHOOL: PRESCRIPTION FOR ADOLESCENTS' SUCCESS.
THE SERVICES OF A DIPLOMATE IN SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY ARE ESSENTIAL FOR AN EFFECTIVE STUDENT-CENTERED HIGH SCHOOL.
DEVELOPMENT OF AN EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM TO INCREASE SCHOOL PERSONNEL'S AWARENESS ABOUT CHILD AND ADOLESCENT DEPRESSION.
EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT IN HIGH SCHOOL PRODUCES HONESTY AND FAIR PLAY NEEDED TO PREVENT DELINQUENCY AND CRIME.
THIRD FORCE PSYCHOLOGY AND TEACHER EDUCATION IN RELATION TO CONTIGUITY AND STANDARDS.
IDENTIFYING HIGH SCHOOL FRESHMEN WITH SERIOUS ATYPICAL BEHAVIOR AND MENTAL HEALTH PROBLEMS FOR DELINQUENCY PREVENTION PURPOSES.
TEACHER'S PERCEPTIONS OF PRINCIPAL EFFECTIVENESS IN SELECTED SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN TENNESSEE.
THE CHANGING ROLE OF SCHOOL SUPERINTENDENT WITH REGARD TO CURRICULUM POLICY AND DECISION MAKING.
A TWO DECADE REVIEW OF THE NUMBER OF STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES RECEIVING FEDERAL MONIES AND THE TYPES OF EDUCATIONAL PLACEMENTS USED.
COGNITIVE-BEHAVIOR TREATMENT OF EXPRESSED ANGER IN ADOLESCENTS WITH CONDUCT DISORDERS.
THE INFLUENCE OF TEACHER EDUCATION ON TEACHERS' BELIEFS ABOUT PURPOSES OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION.
'IDEAL' PROBLEM SOLVING USING A COLLABORATIVE EFFORT FOR SPECIAL NEEDS AND AT-RISK STUDENTS.
SCHOOLS THAT HAVE NOT PROTECTED AND WOKED WITH GAY AND LESBIAN STUDENTS HAVE BEEN SANCTIONED BY THE COURTS.
THE BRAIN: UTILIZING MULTI-SENSORY APPROACHES FOR INDIVIDUAL LEARNING STYLES.
ADMINISTRATORS' AND TEACHERS' PERCEPTIONS OF THE COLLABORATIVE EFFORTS OF INCLUSION IN THE ELEMENTARY GRADES.
INCORPORATING A MULTISOURCE ASSESSMENT APPROACH IN A TEACHER EDUCATION PROGRAM.
THE MODERN UNIVERSITY PROVOST.
IN SUPPORT OF MEMORY RETENTION: A COOPERATIVE ORAL FINAL EXAM.
SELF ANALYSIS: A TOOL TO ENHANCE LEADER EFFECTIVENESS.
EFFECTIVE TEACHING STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT OF STUDENT PERFORMANCE IN AN UNDERGRADUATE MANAGEMENT SCIENCE COURSE.
THE TEACHER'S STRESS AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR THE SCHOOL AS AN ORGANIZATION: HOW CAN TQM HELP?
DISCIPLINE IN K THROUGH 8TH GRADE CLASSROOMS.
FLEXIBILITY, ARROGANCE AND HUMILITY IN THE CLASSROOM: RISING ABOVE THE FOCUS-OBSCURITY FRAMEWORK.
THE MARVELS OF THE AMERICAN PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM.
TEACHER PERCEPTIONS OF THE INCIDENCE AND MANAGEMENT OF ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER.
The Quality of Life Argument in Public Funding of Special-Needs Students in North Carolina.
Preservice Teachers' Explanations of Their Teaching Behavior.
Technology-Enhanced Counselor Training: Essential Technical Competencies.
Attributes of Animation for Learning Scientific Knowledge.
A Field Experiment: Instructor-Based Training vs. Computer-Based Training.
Purposes in Learner Assessment.
The Effect of Network and Public Television Programs on Four and Five Year Olds Ability to Attend to Educational Tasks.
Promising Partnership Preparation for the New Millennium.
At-Risk Adolescents Perceptions of Learning Temperments: Implications for Educational Intervention.
Teachers in Post-Proposition-228 Southern California: Implications for Teacher Education.
Feedback, Conversation and Power in the Field Experience of Preservice Teachers.
Precocious Precognition: Targeting Tomorrow's University Researchers in Today's Middle Schools.
Case Studies of the Psychological and Forensic Assessment of Parental Child Abuse.
Character Education: Who Is Responsible?
African American Students' Perceptions of Their Treatment by Caucasian Teachers.
Approaching A Taxonomy 21.
The Principal and Evaluation of Student Achievement.
A Content Analysis of the Style of Speeches of Black College Students.
Changing Trends in Business Shape Education's Focus on Integrity.
A Comparative Study of Block Scheduling and Traditional Scheduling on Academic Achievement.
The Educator's Role In Reporting the Emotional Abuse of Children.
Designing Teacher Education Course Syllabi That Integrate Service Learning.
A New Epistemological Context for Education: Knowledge Management in Public Schools.
A Validity Study of the Kentucky's Performance Based Assessment System with National Merit Scholars and National Merit Commended.
Introduction to Multicultural and Cross-Cultural Consultation in Schools: Cultural Diversity Issues in School Consultation.
Consultation Through a Multicultural Lens: Multicultural and Cross-Cultural Consultation in Schools.
Considerations of Multiculturalism and Diversity in Behavioral Consultation with Parents and Teachers.
School Psychology Review: Ending the 20th Century and Looking Ahead to the Future.
The Ecology of School Psychology: Examining and Changing Our Paradigm for the 21st Century.
The Present and Future Status of School Psychology in the United States.
The National Association of School Psychologists and the Division of School Psychology--APA: Now and Beyond.
School Psychologists as Health-Care Providers in the 21st Century: Conceptual Framework, Professional Identity, and Professional Practice.
The School Psychologist as Community-Focused, Public Health Professional: Emerging Challenges and Implications for Training.
School Psychology from an Instructional Perspective: Solving Big, Not Little Problems.
School Psychology Training for the 21st Century: Challenges and Opportunities.
Uncovering Critical Research Agendas for School Psychology: Conceptual Dimensions and Future Directions.
ON THE ROAD TO CZESTOCHOWA: RHETORIC AND EXPERIENCE ON A POLISH PILGRIMAGE.
THE HUMAN MOTIVATIONAL COMPLEX: EVOLUTIONARY THEORY AND THE CAUSES OF HUNTER-GATHERER FIGHTING, PART II. PROXIMATE, SUBORDINATE, AND DERIVATIVE CAUSES.
YOUTH AND THE SOCIAL IMAGINATION IN AFRICA: INTRODUCTION TO PARTS 1 AND 2.
WHERE HAVE ALL THE BABIES GONE? TOWARD AN ANTHROPOLOGY OF INFANTS (AND THEIR CARETAKERS).
BETWEEN SEVERAL WORLDS: IMAGES OF YOUTH AND AGE IN TUAREG POPULAR PERFORMANCES.
YOUNG CONVERTS: CHRISTIAN MISSIONS, GENDER AND YOUTH IN ONITSHA, NIGERIA 1880-1929.
ON EVOLVED MOTIVATIONS FOR WAR.
REPLY TO FERGUSON.
EVANGELISM AND CONSUMER CULTURE IN NORTHERN TANZANIA.
GIRLS WITH GUNS: NARRATING THE EXPERIENCE OF WAR OF FRELIMO'S "FEMALE DETACHMENT"
THE CULTURE DEVELOPMENT CLUB: YOUTH, NEO-TRADITION, AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOCIETY IN GUINEA-BISSAU.
THEY CUT SEGAMETSI INTO PARTS: RITUAL MURDER, YOUTH, AND THE POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE IN BOTSWANA.
Energy Economists and Economic Liberalism.
Model-Based Comparisons of Pool and Bilateral Markets for Electricity.
OPEC and World Crude Oil Markets from 1973 to 1994: Cartel, Oligopoly, or Competitive?
The Risk of Early Retirement of U.S. Nuclear Power Plants under Electricity Deregulation and Co2 Emission Reductions.
No Cost Efforts to Reduce Carbon Emissions in the U.S.: An Economic Perspective.
The Potential Market for Photovoltaics and Other Distributed Resources in Rural Electric Cooperatives.
Customers' Choice Among Retail Energy Suppliers: The Willingness-to-pay for Service Attributes.
Supplementarity: An Invitation to Monopsony?
Regulation of an Electric Power Transmission Company.
Developing Countries' Greenhouse Emissions: Uncertainty and Implications for Participation in the Kyoto Protocol.
WRITING CULTURE RELIABILITY: THE ANALYSIS OF HIGH-CONCORDANCE CODES.
PARALLEL-COUSIN (FBD) MARRIAGE, ISLAMATION, AND ARABIZATION.
STORIES FROM THE FIELD, HANDICRAFT PRODUCTION, AND MEXICAN NATIONAL PATRIMONY: A LESSON IN TRANSLOCALITY FROM B. TRAVEN.
THE USE OF HUMAN IMAGES IN YORUBA MEDICINES.
THE EVOLUTION OF MARKET NICHES IN OAXACAN WOODCARVING.
POETICS AND POLITICS OF NEWLY INVENTED TRADITIONS IN THE GULF: CAMEL RACING IN THE UNITED STATES ARAB EMIRATES.
Elder-Abuse Offenders: A Typology .
The Role of the Interdisciplinary Geriatric Assessment in Addressing Self-Neglect of the Elderly.
HUNGARY AFTER 1989: INSCRIBING A NEW PAST ON PLACE.
THE ODYSSEY OF JAPANESE COLONISTS IN THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.
PRAÇAS, PLACE, AND PUBLIC LIFE IN URBAN BRAZIL[sup *].
WATER RESOURCES OF THE CHUNCHUCMIL MAYA[sup *].
URBAN-SYSTEM EVOLUTION ON THE FRONTIER OF THE ECUADORIAN AMAZON.
SPIRITUAL PILGRIMS AT MOUNT SHASTA, CALIFORNIA[sup *].
BAVARIAN LEAVENWORTH AND THE SYMBOLIC ECONOMY OF A THEME TOWN.
EXPEDITIONARY ART: AN APPRAISAL[sup *].
GLOBAL IGNORANCE.
GEOGRAPHICAL RECORD.
TRACKING THE CYBERSPACE ELEPHANT.
Culturally Sensitive Social Work Practice With Arab Clients in Mental Health Settings.
Risk Factors Associated With PTSD and Major Depression Among Cambodian Refugees in Utah.
Depression Among Victims of South Mississippi's Methyl Parathion Disaster.
Adolescents With Sickle Cell Disease: Determinants of Support Group Attendance and Satisfaction.
A Deconstructive Turn in Chronic Pain Treatment: A Redefined Role for Social Work.
The Power to Choose: Supports for Families Caring for Individuals with Developmental Disabilities.
A 'Society for All Ages': Saving Social Security and Medicare.
Another Look at the NIMBY Phenomenon.
Creating Cost-Efficient Initiatives in Social Work Practice in the Cardiac Program of an Acute Care Hospital.
African American Gerontology Network.
Suggestions to Social Workers for Surviving in Managed Care.
Characters With Visual Impairment in Young Adult Literature: Are They Effective Role Models for Our Teens?
Suitcase Mobility: A Case Study Packed With Opportunities for Learning.
Springboard.
A Demographic Study of Certified Orientation and Mobility Specialists.
Low Vision and the Older Adult.
Increasing Language Development Through Orientation and Mobility Instruction.
Abuse and Violence in the Lives of People With Low Vision: A National Survey.
Springboard.
Picture This: A Pilot Study for Improving Street Crossings for Deaf-Blind Travelers.
Beyond Blindfolds: Creating an Inclusive Classroom Through Collaboration.
Some Methodological Problems in Estimating Incidence and Prevalence in Child Sexual Abuse Research.
Dermatoglyphic Analysis of Total Finger Ridge Count in Female Monozygotic Twins Discordant for Sexual Orientation.
Sexual Risk Behaviors and Alcohol: Higher Base Rates Revealed using the Unmatched-Count Technique.
Adolescent Males' Willingness to Report Masturbation.
Trends in Same-gender Sexual Partnering, 1988-1998.
Exposing the "Pretty Woman" Myth: A Qualitative Examination of the Lives of Female Streetwalking Prostitutes.
Female Crack Users and Their Sexual Relationships: The Role of Sex-For-Crack Exchanges.
Acculturation Attitudes and Sociocultural Adjustment of Sojourner Youth in Israel.
Motivation in Person Perception: Role of the Other's Perspective.
Sensation-Seeking and Differentially Arousing Television Commercials.
Crowding Effects of Density and Personal Space Requirements Among Older People: The Impact of Self-Control and Social Support.
Chinese Implicit Leadership Theory.
Perceived Job Image Among Police Officers in Singapore: Factorial Dimensions and Differential Effects.
Coping Style Following Acute Stress in Competitive Sport.
Affectionate Same-Sex Touch: The Influence of Homophobia on Observers' Perceptions.
Professionals' Use of Different Mentor Sources at Various Career Stages: Implications for Career Success.
Abstinence and Well-Being Among Members of Alcoholics Anonymous: Personal Experience and Social Perceptions.
The Effect of Children's Sleeping Arrangements (Communal vs. Familial) on Fatherhood Among Men in an Israeli Kibbutz.
Perceptions of Dual Identity and Separate Groups Among Secular and Religious Israeli Jews.
Work Values Among Lebanese Workers.
Self-Efficacy and Job-Seeking Activities in Unemployed Ethnic Youth.
Development and Validation of a Scale Measuring Attitudes Toward Smoking.
Birth Order and Civil Disobedience: A Test of Sulloway's 'Born to Rebel' Hypothesis.
Confirmatory Factor Analyses of the Full and Short Versions of the Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability Scale.
The Commodified Self in Consumer Culture: A Cross-Cultural Perspective.
Understandings and Experiences of Cruelty: An Exploratory Report.
Depressive Symptoms Among U.S. and Indian College Students: The Effects of Gender and Gender Role.
Film Violence and the Institutionalization of the Cinema.
The Influences of Peer and University Culture on Female Student Athletes' Perceptions of Career Termination, Professionalization, and Social Isolation.
Construct Validity of the Anxiety Rating Scale-2 with Individual Sport Athletes.
Gender Comparisons of Preferred Coaching Behaviors in Australian Sports.
The Benefits To Sport Achievement When a Multiple Goal Orientation is Emphasized.
Development of the Power in Sport Questionnaire.
Spirituality and Being in the Zone in Team Sports: A Relationships?
Athletic Identity in Marathon Runners: Functional Focus or Dysfunctional Commitment?
Risk Factors for Disordered Eating in Female University Athletes.
Sex Differences in Sport Fan Behavior and Reasons for Being a Sport Fan.
Influence of Martial Arts Training on the Perception of Experimentally Induced Pressure Pain and Selected Psychological Responses.
Most Successful and Least Successful Performances: Perceptions of Causal Attributes in High School Track Athletes.
Commitment to Distance Running: Coping Mechanism or Addiction?
Relationship Between Goal Orientation, Self-Confidence and Multidimensional Trait Anxiety among Mexican-American Female Youth Athletes.
Predicting Athlete Preparation and Performance.
Predictors of Likelihood to Aggress in Youth Soccer: An Examination of Coed and All-Girls Teams.
Trouble in the Colonial Melting Pot.
The 'Best Union Members': Class, Race, Culture, and Black Worker Militancy in Chicago's Stockyards during the 1930s.
'Lynch-law Must Go!': Race, Citizenship, and the Other in an American Coal Mining Town.
Our Hearts Burn with Ardent Love for Two Countries: Ethnicity and Assimilation at Chicago Holiday Celebrations, 1876-1918. (cover story)
Your Old Men Will Dream Dreams: The Italian Pentecostal Experience in Canada, 1912-1945.
Epistolary Ethics: Personal Correspondence and the Culture of Emigration in the Nineteenth Century.
Cajun-French Language Maintenance and Shift: A Southwest Louisiana Case Study to 1970.
Jim Crow Among Strangers: The Growth of Baltimore's Little Italy and Maryland's Disfranchisement Campaigns.
Weaving and the Construction of a Gender Division of Labor in Early Colonial Peru.
The Indian Health Service and the Sterilization of Native American Women.
The Fatalistic Hobo: Jacob Holdt, Touring, and the Other Americans.
Introduction: Asia and America At Century's End.
The Challenges and Tensions of a Globalized World.
Thinking Through Binaries: Conceptual Strategies for Interdependence.
The Sino-American Alliance During World War II and the Lifting of the Chinese Exclusion Acts.
China-US Relations: The Past as Looking Glass.
Academic Dependency in the Social Sciences: Reflections on India and Malaysia.
The More Things Change: Paradigm Shifts in Asian American Studies.
Toward a More Worldly World Series: Reading Game Three of the 1998 American League Championship and David Wong Louie's ''Warming Trends''
Intersections: Global Feminisms, American Studies.
American Studies and Feminist Scholarship in Portugal.
The Center Can(not) Hold: American Studies and Global Feminism.
American Feminism and Pedagogy: The Case of Poland.
Double Texts: Representing America and Discussing Women's Issues in Indonesia.
American Studies and Gender Issues in an International Classroom.
Crossings: Multiple Margins Meet on the Bridge.
American Studies and the Liberation of a Japanese Woman: A Personal Narrative.
Nowhere Woman? A Reflection on Being Indian, Lesbian, and Academic in the United States.
Feminist Ruptures in Women's Studies and American Studies.
De-Americanizing American Studies and Feminist Studies: Notes of a Portuguese Feminist Americanist.
The Internationalization of American Studies.
THE LIMITS OF STATE POWER IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
TURKISH FOREIGN POLICY AND JERUSALEM: TOWARD A SOCIETAL CONSTRUCTION OF FOREIGN POLICY.
PHOSPHATE EXPORTS BY JORDAN.
SECTARIANISM AND BUSINESS ASSOCIATIONS IN POSTWAR LEBANON.
GLOBAL OVERVIEW: WATER RESOURCES AND DISTRIBUTION ISSUES. (cover story)
THE INTERIM AGREEMENT AND INTERNATIONAL LAW.
WOMEN IN THE DISCOURSE OF SAYYID QUTB.
DYNASTIC MODERNISM AND ITS CONTRADICTIONS: TESTING THE LIMITS OF PLURALISM, TRIBALISM, AND KING HUSSEIN'S EXAMPLE IN HASHEMITE JORDAN.
SECTARIAN ATTITUDES AS A FUNCTION OF THE PALESTINIAN PRESENCE IN LEBANON.
'The Loyal Reflection of Taiwan's Current Situation: Our Policy in News Collecting and Editing,' 1991.
'Expanding Freedom of Speech,' 23 June 1987.
'Reflection on the Lifting of Newspaper Censorship,' 10 January 1988.
'How Can the Party in Power Crack the Difficulties in the Democratic Election? On the Democratization of In-Party Nomination and the Nurturing of Politicians,' 18 May 1985.
'On Political Parties,' 6 October 1987.
'Today's Inaction Will Lead to Tomorrow's Regret: The Urgency of Enriching the Legislature,' 27 October 1987.
'The Realization of Democracy Must Begin from the Local Level,' 27 January 1988.
'The Acceleration of Political Reform: The Repeal of Martial Law in Taiwan,' 24 March 1988.
'Some Sincere Admonitions for the Democratic Progressive Party,' 9 April 1988.
'The Party in Power Should Improve the Separation between Party and Political Power,' 18 July 1988.
'Please Take into Consideration the Rights of Farmers and Consumers: A Comment on Taking Back the Fruit Import License,' 7 December 1987.
'We Support the Complete Reform of State-Run Business: Make the Resolution and Reach the Goal,' 19 December 1987.
'Respect the Basic Human Rights of Our Disabled Compatriots,' 2 May 1985.
'We Advocate that the Overseas Dissidents Come Back to Taiwan,' 26 July 1988.
'The General Situation and the Mortality in Taiwanese Society: Comment on the Fight against Criminal Groups and the Case of '#10 Credit Union Corruption,'' 15 March 1986.
Foreign Direct Investment in Korea: Recent Developments and Prospects.
The Asian Values Debate: Implications for the Spread of Liberal Democracy.
Relations between the Chinese Mainland and Taiwan: PRC White Paper, February 2000.
Intolerance in the Fledgling Korean Democracy.
Is American Opposition to Whaling Anti-Japanese?
Hong Kong in the Eyes of Chinese Cadres.
Diplomacy against Adversity: Foreign Relations under Chiang Ching-kuo.
Imagining Communities in Central Asia: Nationalism and Interstate Affect in the Post-Soviet Era.
Whither Geoeconomics? Bureaucratic Inertia in U.S. Post-Cold War Foreign Policy toward East Asia.
Additional Documents on Relations between the Chinese Mainland and Taiwan.
Calling All Regio-Cops.
The New Sovereigntists.
The Middle Kingdom Runs Dry.
A Foreign Policy for the Global Age.
Defending America in the Twenty-first Century.
Beyond Border Control.
Vietnam's Contradictions.
The Confirmation Clog.
Turkey's Dream of Democracy.
Pakistan's Jihad Culture.
Restoring the Forests.
Loose Nukes.
Reality vs. Utopia.
The New Apathy.
Choosing Engagement.
The Missile-Defense Mistake.
The Folly of Arms Control.
Africa's Mess, Mugabe's Mayhem.
A Chilean Model for Russia.
Redesigning Foreign Aid.
Out-of-Control Immigration.
Chile's Transformed Party System and the Future of Democratic Stability.
Party System Deinstitutionalization: The 1997-98 Colombian Elections in Historical Perspective.
Democratization and Changes in the Pattern of Association in Brazil.
Crafting Civilian Control in Emerging Democracies: Argentina and Venezuela.
Introduction.
Democratization Through Peace: The Difficult Case of Guatemala.
Demilitarization and Security in El Salvador and Guatemala: Convergences of Success and Crisis.
Global Forces and Regime Change: Guatemala in the Central American Context.
Neoliberalism, the Global Elite, and the Guatemalan Transition: A Critical Macrosocial Analysis.
Guatemala in the Global System.
INCOME DISTRIBUTION AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION IN THE ARGENTINE INTERIOR.
NEOLIBERALISM, CORPORATISM, AND SMALL BUSINESS POLITICAL ACTIVISM IN CONTEMPORARY MEXICO.
EDITOR'S FOREWORD.
POVERTY, INEQUALITY, AND GROWTH IN LATIN AMERICA: Searching for the High Road to Globalization.
THE LOGIC OF CLIENTELISM IN ARGENTINA: An Ethnographic Account.
CLASS, ETHNICITY, AND GENDER IN BRAZIL: The Negotiation of Workers' Identities in Porto Alegre's 1906 Strike.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ISSUE NETWORKS IN AMAZONIA.
THE NEW MONUMENT TO THE WOMEN OF SOUTH AFRICA.
THE ICOM RED LIST.
REVISITING Pwo.
HOME IS WHERE THE ART IS.
African Art at the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art.
Beyond the Barrier: The Unifying Role of the Choir Screen in Gothic Churches.
Corporate Colors: Bonifacio and Tintoretto at the Palazzo dei Camerlenghi in Venice.
The Unified Church Interior in Baroque Italy: S. Maria Maggiore in Bergamo.
David's Telemachus and Eucharis: Reflections on Love, Learning, and History.
Beyond the Grave: The Twentieth-Century Afterlife of West Mexican Burial Effigies.
Arts, Words, Intellect, Education.
MUSICLINK: Nurturing Talent and Recognizing Achievement.
Traditions and Experiment / Diversity and Change: Issues for Dance in American Education.
Arts Education in the Information Age: A New Place for Somatic Wisdom.
The Right Staff: The True Key to Arts-Focused Schools of Choice.
Change in Arts Education: Transforming Education Through the Arts Challenge (TETAC).
Educational Renewal and the Arts.
The Relationships of School Art, National Goals, and Multilayered Cultures.
Creating a Cultural Policy for Namibia.
Cultural Policies in Kenya.
Re-thinking Arts Education in Ghana.
Classroom Teachers' and Music Specialists' Perceived Ability to Implement the...
Introduction.
Arts Education in Wonderland.
Arts, Words, Intellect, Emotion Part 2: Toward Artistic Mindedness.
But Are They Implemented? The Promise and Reality of the National Theartre Standards.
Access, Education, and Preservation through the Prism of American Dance.
National Standards for Music Education and College Preservice Music Teacher Education: A New Balance.
What's in a Name? Minority Access to Precollege Arts Education.
Machado de Assis and Jorge Luis Borges: Immortality and Its Discontents. (cover story)
Authorizing Literary Propaganda: Alfonso de Valdes' Dialogo de las cosas acaecidas en Roma (1527).
Benavente and the Spanish Discourse on Theater.
CONQUERING MYTHS: THE CONSTRUCTION OF 'MEXICO' IN THE SPANISH REPUBLICAN IMAGINARY OF EXILE.
THE ETYMOLOGY OF HISPANO-ROMANCE TOMAR 'TO TAKE'
LOVE AND SEX IN MARIO VARGAS LLOSA'S ...QUIEN MATO A PALOMINO MOLERO?
Sign Language: The Semiotics of Love in Lope's el Perro del Hortelano. (cover story)
A Collision of Rationalism and Spiritualism in 'El Hombre De La Rosa' of Manuel Rojas: Decoding The Secret Signals.
Inquisition Confessions and Lazarillo De Tormes.
Como era gostoso meu frances: Tropicalismo in the Cinema.
How to Organize a Movement: Caetano Veloso's Tropical Path.
Tropicalia, Canonical Pop.
Critical Responses to the Screening of Nelson Rodrigues.
After the Rubbish: Eduardo Coutinho's The Scavengers.
MENC TODAY.
FIRST THINGS FIRST SELECTING REPERTOIRE.
CHALLENGES OF PERFORMING DIVERSE CULTURAL MUSIC.
DEVELOPING A CHILDREN'S CHOIR CONCERT.
REPERTOIRE IS THE CURRICULUM.
ORCHESTRATING THE BAND A NEW DIRECTION.
THE EXCITEMENT OF COLLABORATION.
MENC Today.
Why vision 2020?
From Tanglewood to Tallahassee in 32 years.
Standard Operating Procedure.
MENC TODAY.
TEACHING IMPROVISATION AND 20TH-CENTURY IDIOMS.
STARTING A HIGH SCHOOL CHAMBER MusIc GROUP.
MOVING MUSICAL EXPERIENCES IN CHORUS.
BRINGING MUSIC HISTORY TO LIFE.
ONE COMPUTER CAN DELIVER WHOLE-CLASS INSTRUCTION.
A PERSONAL PERSPECTIVE FOR RESEARCH.
MENC TODAY.
STUDENT TEACHING.
MENTORING NEW MUSIC TEACHERS.
THE LONG VIEW OF LIFELONG LEARNING.
BURNOUT.
VOICES OF EXPERIENCE SPEAK ON MUSIC TEACHING.
MENC TODAY.
IMPLICATIONS OF MUSIC AND BRAIN RESEARCH.
MUSIC AND THE BABY'S BRAIN.
EEG STUDIES WITH YOUNG CHILDREN.
DOES MUSIC MAKE YOU SMARTER?
A VIRTUAL PANEL OF EXPERT RESEARCHERS.
GENERAL MUSIC TOMORROW.
The Architectural Cult of Synchronization.
The Future as Fetish.
'A Horror of Abstract Thought': Postwar Britain and Hamilton's 1951 Growth and Form Exhibition.
Richard Hamilton's Tabular Image.
`The Rock': William Kentridge's Drawings for Projection.
Agriculture, Industry, and the Birth of the Photo-Essay in the Late Weimar Republic.
The Art of the Day.
Tarabukin, Spengler, and the Art of Production.
Self-Portrait of the Artist as a Monkey-Hand.
Camera Obscura: Socialist Realism in the Shadow of Photography.
Jersild's Humpty-Dumpty Darwin.
Textual Dialogue and the Humanistic Tradition.
Literary Castlings in Bernard Foys tredje rockad.
Birgitta Trotzig and the Language of Religious and Literary Experience.
Regimen Politicum and Regimen Regale.
On Popularization.
Escape from the Novel.
Modernism and Aesthetic Dictatorship.
Kellgren's Libretto for Aeneas i Carthago.
Magnus Stephensen: Precursor of the 'Fjolnismenn' and Icelandic Romanticism.
'Som Perler paa den historiske Musas Snor': Romantic Self-Representation and Aesthetics in Adam Oehlenschalger's Ungdomserindringer.
The Much-Ibsen Connection: Exposing a Critical Myth.
Synecdoche, Topic Violence, and Shakespeare's Imitatio in Titus Andronicus.
Antimetabolic King John.
An Ethical Model in a Postmodern Faust: The Daemonic Parody of the Politics of Friendship in Thomas Mann's Doctor Faustus.
Waugh's War and the Loop of History: From Put Out More Flags to Brideshead Revisited and Back Again.
Homoerotic Bonding as Escape from Heterosexual Responsibility in Pynchon's Slow Learner.
Recent Concepts of Narrative and the Narratives of Narrative Theory.
Desire and the Female Protagonist: A Critique of Feminist Narrative Theory.
After Dynamic Narratology.
Recent Work in Critical Theory: Psychoanalytic Criticism.
Recent Work in Critical Theory: Cultural and Historical Criticism.
ART AND REALITY IN ZAMIATIN'S POETIC THEORY.
READING LA CELESTINA FROM A FIN DE SIGLO FEMINIST PERSPECTIVE.
FLAUBERT'S PEARL NECKLACE: WEAVING A GARLAND OF IMAGES IN THE READER'S MEMORY.
'MIORITA': A ROMANIAN BALLAD IN A HOMERIC PERSPECTIVE.
TEMPORAL AND EXISTENTIAL STRUCTURES IN SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR'S LES BELLES...
LOVING WRITING FRAGMENTS D'UN DISCOURS AMOUREUX.
REFLECTIONS ON DAUDET'S 'LA DERNIERE CLASSE: RECIT D'UN PETIT ALSACIEN.'
OUBLIRE: CIXOUS'S POETICS OF FORGETTING.
FRENHOFER'S SUICIDE AND THE DOWNFALL OF LE BARON GROS.
LOUISE ACKERMANN'S MONSTROUS NATURE.
THE DEATH OF A POET: DELPHINE GAY'S ROMANTIC MAKEOVER.
(RE)PLACING WOMEN IN FRENCH POETIC HISTORY: THE ROMANTIC LEGACY.
A Grab for the Ball. (cover story)
Wise Man and More.
Why Bill Clinton Won't Face a Criminal Trial.
Profiting from Experience.
Second Opinions on HMOs.
Science wizards.
Divided justice.
American Bar Association treasurer's report fiscal year ended August 31, 1998.
Trials of the century.
Raising a holy racket.
Both sides now.
Beyond the words.
Experts on experts.
Tough Luck for the INNOCENT MAN. (cover story)
Betting on Cyberspace.
The MONEY CHASE.
Cash-and-Carry Associates. (cover story)
SHOT DOWN in Mid-Theory.
High Tech, Low Privacy.
The Nicest Tough Firm Around.
INTRODUCTION AND HISTORY OF THE CANADA/U.S. LAW INSTITUTE.
CONFERENCE OPENING.
OVERVIEW OF CANADA/U.S. DISPUTE MANAGEMENT AND SETTLEMENT: WHERE WE ARE IN TERMS OF SUCCESSES AND FAILURES -- A U.S. PERSPECTIVE.
DISCUSSION FOLLOWING THE REMARKS OF MR. MURPHY AND MR. FORSYTHE.
THE MANAGEMENT AND RESOLUTION OF CROSS BORDER DISPUTES AS CANADA AND THE U.S. ENTER THE 21ST CENTURY.
DISCUSSION FOLLOWING THE REMARKS OF MR. BLANCHARD AND MR. MACDONALD.
THE CONVERGENCE OF LAW AND DIPLOMACY IN UNITED STATES-CANADA RELATIONS: THE PRECEDENT OF THE GULF OF MAINE CASE.
THE ROLES OF LAW AND DIPLOMACY IN DISPUTE RESOLUTION: THE IJC AS A POSSIBLE MODEL.
DISCUSSION FOLLOWING THE REMARKS OF MR. ROBINSON AND MR. LEGAULT.
THE POLITICS OF CROSS BORDER DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
DISCUSSION FOLLOWING THE REMARKS OF MR. RAE.
NAFTA CHAPTER 19: HOW WELL DOES IT WORK? HOW MUCH IS NEEDED?
CHAPTER 19--PRIVATE PARTY APPEALS FROM GOVERNMENT RULINGS: A DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURE IN OPERATION, HOW EFFECTIVE IS IT IN THE RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES? ARE CHANGES NEEDED OR POSSIBLE?
DISCUSSION FOLLOWING THE REMARKS OF MR. CUNNINGHAM AND MR. POTTER.
CHAPTER 11--PRIVATE PARTY VS. GOVERNMENT, INVESTOR-STATE DISPUTE SETTLEMENT: FRANKENSTEIN OR SAFETY VALVE?
CHAPTER 11 -- PRIVATE PARTY VS. GOVERNMENTS, INVESTOR-STATE DISPUTE SETTLEMENT: FRANKENSTEIN OR SAFETY VALVE?
DISCUSSION FOLLOWING THE REMARKS OF MR. PRICE AND MR. HAIGH.
MEET THE PRESS: HOW DOES THE PRESS VIEW THE HANDLING OF CANADA/U.S. DISPUTES?
MEET THE PRESS: HOW DOES THE PRESS VIEW THE HANDLING OF CANADA/U.S. DISPUTES?
STATES, PROVINCES, AND CROSS-BORDER INTERNATIONAL TRADE.
STATES, PROVINCES, AND CROSS-BORDER INTERNATIONAL TRADE.
DISCUSSION FOLLOWING THE REMARKS OF PROFESSOR SCHAEFER AND MR. GRENIER.
CONFLICTS ON EXPORT CONTROLS AND DEFENSE TRADE MATTERS.
THE MEXICAN VIEW ON THE OPERATION OF NAFTA FOR THE RESOLUTION OF CANADA-U.S.-MEXICO DISPUTES.
DISCUSSION FOLLOWING THE REMARKS OF MR. ALVAREZ.
BIOTECHNOLOGY, FOOD, AND AGRICULTURE DISPUTES OR FOOD SAFETY AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE.
THE LINK BETWEEN PROTECTING NATURAL RESOURCES AND THE ISSUE OF ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE.
APPROPRIATE REGULATION OF ANTIBIOTICS IN LIVESTOCK FEED.
SKI RESORTS AND NATIONAL FORESTS: RETHINKING FOREST SERVICE MANAGEMENT PRACTICES FOR RECREATIONAL USE.
THE BILL OF ATTAINDER CLAUSE: A NEW WEAPON TO CHALLENGE THE OIL POLLUTION ACT OF 1990.
SHAPING NUCLEAR WASTE POLICY AT THE JUNCTURE OF FEDERAL AND STATE LAW.
NUCLEAR POWER RATE REGULATION AFTER EASTERN ENTERPRISES: ARE RATEPAYERS BEING TAKEN FOR A RIDE?
NITRATES FROM AGRICULTURE IN EUROPE.
Turkey at a Crossroad.
Editors' Foreword.
Cleansing Islam from the Public Sphere.
Identity Crises and Political Instability in Turkey.
The Ottoman Legacy and Turkish Politics.
The Struggles of a 'Strong' State.
From Emancipation To Liberation.
Corruption.
Who Guards the Turkish Press?
Turkish Foreign Policy in the Post-Cold War Era.
Turkey in a Changing Security Environment.
The Evolution of the National Security Culture and the Military in Turkey.
Turkey and Eurasia.
Turkey and Israel.
THE SECOND AMENDMENT: STRUCTURE, HISTORY, AND CONSTITUTIONAL CHANGE.
Nietzsche's Political Critique of Modern Science.
On the Paradoxical Place of Political Philosophy in the Structure of Reality.
The Press and Congress.
The Presidency and the News Media.
The Invisible Dance: The Supreme Court and the Press.
A Little Knowledge Is a Dangerous Thing: What We Know about the Role of the Media in State Politics.
Here We Go Again: Presidential Elections and the National Media.
Ceaser's American Political Science.
James Ceaser and the Restoration of Political Science.
America in Speech and in Deed.
Renewing the Political Perspective: Reflections on James Ceaser, Political Science, and Liberal Democracy.
Shakespeare in the Original Klingon: Star Trek and the End of History.
The `Shanghai Coalition': The Chattering Classes and China.
French Foreign Policy Elites and the Crises in the Former Yugoslavia.
UNSCOM in the Time of Cholera.
American Grand Strategy and the Transcaspian Region.
The EU, NATO, and the Extension of Institutional Order in Europe.
The Next Russian President Reflects on Foreign Policy.
U.S. Security Policy and the Two Koreas.
Defending against New Dangers: Arms Control of Weapons of Mass Destruction in a Globalized World.
Beyond the Pale: The Bureaucratic Politics of United States Policy in Mexico.
Negotiating on the Edge: Patterns in North Korea's Diplomatic Style.
A Proposed Model for Explaining Political Violence in Israel.
New Delhi's Nuclear Bomb: A Systemic Analysis.
When the Going Gets Rough: Does the Public Support the Use of Military Force?
Antisocial Behavior, Academic Failure, and School Climate: A Critical Review.
A Prevention Program for Students with or At Risk for ED: Moderating Effects of Variation in Treatment and Classroom Structure.
Multidimensional Treatment Foster Care: A Program for Intensive Parenting, Family Support, and Skill Building.
An Elementary School-Based Prevention Program Targeting Modifiable Antecedents of Youth Delinquency and Violence: Linking the Interests of Families and Teachers (LIFT).
Alternative Education Strategies: Reducing Violence in School and the Community.
Searching for Safe Schools: Legal Issues in the Prevention of School Violence.
Life History Reports of Young Adults Previously Referred for Mental Health Services.
Applying Behavior Analysis Within the Wraparound Process: A Multiple Baseline Study.
The Characteristics and Mental Health of Homeless Adolescents: Age and Gender Differences.
The Development of a State Policy on Families as Allies.
Depression and Play in Early Childhood: Play Behavior of Depressed and Nondepressed...
Strategic Quality Planning.
Does Information Technology Make a Difference in Healthcare Organization Performance? A Multiyear Study.
Providing Mental Health Services under Managed Care Arrangements: The Challenges.
Physician-Assisted Suicide and Health Services Delivery.
The Cosmic Muffin Hypothesis: Implications for Public Policy.
Satisfaction with the Billing Process: Using a Patient Survey to Identify Opportunities for Process Improvement.
Futile Treatment and the Health Services Manager.
Preventing Death, Promoting Flourishing Lives: Can We Do Both?
Preventing Needlestick Injuries in Healthcare Settings.
A Visit to a Mexican Specialty Hospital: The Patient as Leader?
Looking for Dr. Jekyll but Hiring Mr. Hyde: Preventing Negligent Hiring, Supervision, Retention, and Training.
Misconceptions regarding Restructuring of Registered Nurse Positions in Western New York and Southern Ontario.
Economic Development: A Moral Imperative for Creating Flourishing Communities.
Targeting cytokines in asthma therapy: round one.
Effect of sibutramine on weight maintenance after weight loss: a randomised trial.
Non-invasive pressure support ventilation versus conventional oxygen therapy in acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema: a randomised trial.
Persistence of DNA from Mycobacterium tuberculosis in superficially normal lung tissue during latent infection.
Low-dose dopamine in patients with early renal dysfunction: a placebo-controlled randomised trial.
Effects of an interleukin-5 blocking monoclonal antibody on eosinophils, airway hyper-responsiveness, and the late asthmatic response.
Effects of recombinant human interleukin-12 on eosinophils, airway hyper-responsiveness, and the late asthmatic response.
Randomised double-blind placebo-controlled trial of SPf66 malaria vaccine in children in...
Randomised controlled trial of conservation therapy for breast cancer: 6-year analysis of the...
Double-blind randomised trial of co-amoxiclav versus placebo for persistent otitis media with...
Treatment of refractory urge urinary incontinence with sacral spinal nerve stimulation in multiple..
Clinical, immunological, and pathological consequences of Fas-deficient conditions.
Vesicoureteric reflux: all in the genes?
HIV-related oral disease.
Early thrombolytic treatment in acute myocardial infarction: Reappraisal of the golden hour.
Biofeedback training in treatment of childhood constipation: A randomised controlled study.
Tissue concentration of clindamycin and gentamicin near ischaemic ulcers with transvenous...
Blood pressure and atherogenic lipoprotein profiles of fish-diet and vegetarian villagers in...
Randomised study of endoscopic biliary endoprosthesis versus duct clearance for bileduct stones...
Riluzole.
Antiretroviral drugs for AIDS.
The saga of burcellosis: Controversy over credit for linking Malta fever with goats' milk.
A multi-purpose rehabilitation frame: A novel apparatus for balance training during standing of neurologically impaired individuals.
Treadmill training of paraplegic patients using a robotic orthosis.
A mechanized gait trainer for restoration of gait.
User involvement in the design and evaluation of a smart mobility aid.
Lumbar corsets: Their effect on three-dimensional kinematics of the pelvis.
Functional outcome after high tibial osteotomy: A study using individual goal achievement as the primary outcome variable.
Thermal response of skin to cyclic pressure and pressure with shear: A technical note.
Voltage-gated sodium channels and the molecular pathogenesis of pain: A review.
Effect of exercise on perceived quality of life of individuals with Parkinson's disease.
Effect of functional neuromuscular stimulation on postural related orthostatic stress in individuals with acute spinal cord injury.
Proposed test method for and evaluation of wheelchair seating system (WCSS) crashworthiness.
Evaluation of wheelchair back support crashworthiness: combination wheelchair back support surfaces and attachment hardware.
Development of frontal impact crashworthy wheelchair seating design criteria computer simulation.
Injury risk assessment of wheelchair occupant restraint systems in a frontal crash: A case for integrated restraints.
Of Melodrama and Academic Discipleship.
A Descent to Cultural Studies.
The Correct Colors of a Faculty.
Seven Principles of Higher Education: A Primer.
Whiteness Scholars vs. the Jews.
Where Thought Is the Currency.
AMICUS CURIAE.
The Forbidden Discovery of Kennewick Man.
Where Ethics Has Gone.
In Defense of Academic Freedom.
Either Feminism or Humanity.
Confronting Relativism.
Can Moral Philosophy Teach Us Anything?
Starting from Scratch.
Synagogues.
Fish, Flesh, and Foul.
Nobel Tics.
England in Jamaica.
The True Embodiment of Everything That's Excellent.
Cut Time.
The Authority of Failure.
The Electronic Book. (cover story)
Falling in Love with Yiddish.
Like Hyenas, Like Baudelaire, Like the Angel of the Resurrection.
Vacationing in Croatia.
Bellow and Ravelstein.
Lord Jim and the Transformation of Community.
Pater's Sadness.
Darwin, Freud, and Adam Phillips.
Balanchine Noir: The Four Temperaments.
Napoleon on Happiness.
Glenn Gould, the Virtuoso as Intellectual.
Re-reading Elizabeth Bowen.
The Wildness of David Ferry.
Thoughts on the Centennial of Fred Astaire.
The Novels of Dawn Powell.
Confronting Ethnic Cleansing in the Twenty-first Century.
Global Requiem: The Apocalyptic Moment in Religion, Science, and Art.
The Green Face of God: Christianity in an Age of Ecocide.
The Color of the Enemy in the New Millennium.
First We Take Manhattan, Then We Take Berlin: Bonhoeffer's New York.
Joking with Jesus in the Poetry of Kathleen Norris and Annie Dillard.
How Zen Found Me.
The Culture of Religious Combining: Reflections for the New American Millennium.
The Academy and Hospitality.
Post-Holocaust Hermeneutics: Scripture, Sacrament, and the Jewish Body of Christ.
Decentering Judaism and Christianity: Using Feminist Theory to Construct a Postmodern Jewish-Christian Theology.
A Survey of Jewish Reaction to the Vatican Statement on the Holocaust.
Is Paul the Father of Misogyny and Antisemitism?
Tuning Hebrew Psalms to Reggae Rhythms: Rastas' Revolutionary Lamentations for Social Change.
'Fruit Salad Can Be Delicious': The Practice of Buddhist-Christian Dialogue.
The Social Contract and Human Rights.
Force and the Value of War Stories.
Selling Serenity.
The Rationality of an Illusion.
A Humane Death Sentence?
KENT STATE THIRTY YEARS LATER. (cover story)
No, Virginia, Abortion Is NOT Genocide.
Humanity's Juncture.
NATO's `Humanitarian' War.
Invisible History.
A New Sense of the Sacred.
Humanism in the Twenty-first Century.
Humanity's Challenge.
The Big Tent: Too Small for Women?
When Blue Becomes Gold.
Taking Action Against Boy Scout Discrimination.
Reclaiming the High Ground.
Why the Left Is Fragmented (and a Modest Proposal to Counter It).
Oil, Profit$, and the Question of Alternative Energy.
A Test of Our Resolve.
The Humanist Basis for Human Rights.
FOUR PARADIGMS OF PHILOSOPHICAL POLITICS.
THE SELF AGAINST AND FOR ITSELF: MONTAIGNE AND SEXTUS EMPIRICUS ON FREEDOM, DISCIPLINE AND RESISTANCE.
SOMAESTHETICS AND CARE OF THE SELF: THE CASE OF FOUCAULT.
SOCIETY AS A WAY OF LIFE: PERFECTIBILITY, SELF-TRANSFORMATION, AND THE ORIGINATION OF SOCIETY IN ROUSSEAU.
ON SLOWNESS IN PHILOSOPHY.
Connected Knowing.
CONNECTED KNOWING AND DEVELOPMENTAL THEORY.
Connected Knowing and `Somatic Empathy' among Somatic Educators and Students of Somatic Education.
RESONANT CONNECTIONS.
Intuitive Inquiry: Interpreting Objective and Subjective Data.
Physics, Gaia, and Ch'i.
The Soul of Mother Russia: Russian Symbols and Pre-Russian Cultural Identity.
Fragments of Ancient Beliefs: The Snake as a Multivocal Symbol in Nordic Mythology.
An Archaeomythological Reflection on the Labyrinth.
The Shape of Sacredness: From Prehistoric Temples to Neo-Byzantine Churches.
Sexuality, the Sheela na gigs, and the Goddess in Ancient Ireland.
Millennial Meanings.
Millennial Twins.
HARDY NATIVES AT HOME ON THE U.S. RANGE.
Spinosad Battles Crop Pests.
Mapping the Way to Disease-Free Chickens.
Guarding Against a Plant Disease Epidemic. (cover story)
Many Crops Could Benefit.
Pilot Plants Push Tech Transfer.
USING SPACE-AGE TECHNOLOGY TO OPEN A NEW WINDOW INTO THE WORLD OF HORTICULTURE.
Terrific New Potatoes for Growers and Gardeners.
Holding Back Floodwaters.
How Attractive Are You? To Mosquitoes, That Is.
Zoonoses!
Precise Inputs for a Cleaner Environment.
Biodegradable Decoy Reduces Insecticide Use.
Ultra-Narrow-Row Cotton.
The Grass Farmers Love to Hate. (cover story)
Global Search for Climbing Fern's Foes.
Phytoremediation: Using Plants to Clean Up Soils. (cover story)
Temperature-Sensitive Medflies.
Asian Longhorned Beetles.
Foreign Agents Imported for Weed Control.
Watch Out Water-hyacinth!
Buzzing With Potential.
The Fort Knox of Exotic Weed Diseases.
The Cyber Cow Whisperer and His Virtual Fence.
Whitewashing Agriculture.
Mites Get Frozen, Photographed, and Identified.
Taking Aim at Formosan Subterranean Termites.
New Systems Research Targets Precision Agriculture's Effectiveness.
When 'Aloha' Means Goodbye--to Pests Curbing Pests in Hawaii's Ornamental Paradise.
Bringing You Better Beans.
Citizenship and Compulsory Military Service: The Revolutionary Origins of Conscription in the United States.
U.S. Military Attitudes Toward Post-Cold War Missions.
The Impact of Multiple Deployments on Soldiers' Peacekeeping Attitudes, Morale, and Retention.
War by Other Means: The Problem of Political Control in Irish Republican Strategy.
Nationalism, National Security, and Amazônia: Military Perceptions and Attitudes in Contemporary Brazil.
Militarized Decision-Making for War in Pakistan: 1947-1971.
Psychological Propaganda: The War of Ideas on Ideas During the First Half of the Twentieth Century.
Why Don't Minorities Join Special Operations Forces?
Distinctive Military Attitudes among U.S. Enlistees, 1976-1997: Self-Selection versus Socialization.
Civil-Military Relations in Democratizing Indonesia: Change amidst Continuity.
Latest Progress In Anaerobic Digestion.
What's Next For Nonprofit Recyclers?
Versatile Blends Succeed In The Market.
Analyzing Compost Economics.
Biosolids Management In The Western Region.
Evaluating Degradable Polymers In Controlled Laboratory Environments.
BioCycle World.
Regional Roundup.
University and Company Team Up for Composting and Recycling.
Deconstruction Fits the Bill for Businesses.
Outside Storage of Wood Chips.
Regulators Tackle Manure Management.
Turning Animal By-Products Into Resources.
Swedish City Uses Anaerobic Technology.
Composting Liquid Food Residuals.
Using Compost To Control Plant Diseases.
Recycling And Composting Of Solid Waste In Russian Cities.
BioCycle World.
Regional Roundup.
How to Successfully Manage a Compost Facility.
Compost Site Comes Back From the Brink.
Organics Recycling Takes Big Chunk Out of Solid Waste.
The Many Colors of Mulch.
Prudent Maintenance Practices.
Evaluating Microbiology Of Compost.
Setting Metals Standards for Fertilizers.
Global Change and Biodiversity Linkages across the Sediment-Water Interface.
Restoring Hawaii's Dry Forests.
Biodiversity Above and Below the Surface of Soils and Sediments: Linkages and Implications for Global Change. (cover story)
Interactions between Aboveground and Belowground Biodiversity in Terrestrial Ecosystems: Patterns, Mechanisms, and Feedbacks. (cover story)
Linkages between Aquatic Sediment Biota and Life Above Sediments as Potential Drivers of Biodiversity and Ecological Processes.
Linking Biodiversity Above and Below the Marine Sediment-Water Interface.
Effects of Global Changes on Above-and Belowground Biodiversity in Terrestrial Ecosystems: Implications for Ecosystem Functioning.
Global Change and the Biodiversity of Freshwater Ecosystems: Impacts on Linkages between Above-Sediment and Sediment Biota.
Down on the Fish Farm: Developing Effluent Standards for Aquaculture.
Antidotes for Antibiotic Use on the Farm.
Evolution of a Multisite Network Information System: The LTER Information Management Paradigm.
The Evolution of Plant Ecophysiological Traits: Recent Advances and Future Directions.
Environmental Education in the United States: A Survey of Preservice Teacher Education Programs.
A Modified NEP/DSP Environmental Attitudes Scale.
Environmental Education as a Catalyst for Transfer of Learning in Young Children.
Developing a Measure of Perceived Environmental Risk.
Professional Development of Nonformal Environmental Educators Through School-based Partnerships.
Are We Building Environmental Literacy?
Environmental Education Course Development for Preservice Secondary School Science Teachers in the Republic of Korea.
How Earth's Ice Is Changing.
A Global Environmental Agenda for the United States.
THE CONTINUING CHALLENGE OF FOOD PRODUCTION.
Spectrum.
Protecting Europe's Seas. (cover story)
Spectrum.
Oceans Apart?
The Case for a World Environment Organization.
The Constitution and the Costs of Clean Air.
SPECTRUM.
Political Transformation and the Environment in Southeast Asia.
EMISSIONS TRADING SYSTEMS AND ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE.
Space Pixels: The Next Generation of Earth Remote Sensing.
SPECTRUM.
the Ultimate Challenge.
CHANGING PLACES.
Coastal Erosion.
Custom circuit design as a driver of microprocessor performance.
Minimal-storage high-performance Cholesky factorization via blocking and recursion.
A performance methodology for commercial servers.
A multithreaded PowerPC processor for commercial servers.
S/390 microprocessor design.
An SXGA reflective liquid crystal projection light valve incorporating inversion by pixel bootstrapping.
Bandwidth problems in high-speed networks.
Characterization of Constitutional Liquid Film Migration in Nickel-Base Alloy 718. (cover story)
Parallel Image Processing with the Block Data Parallel Architecture.
Augmented Intensional Reasoning in Knowledge-Based Accounting Systems.
Accounting Information Systems Doctoral Dissertations: 1999.
AICPA/CICA SYSTRUST Principles and Criteria.
Discussion of AICPA/CICA SYSTRUST Principles and Criteria.
Open Question-and-Answer Session AICPA/CICA SYSTRUST.
COBIT: A Methodology for Managing and Controlling Information and Information Technology Risks and Vulnerabilities.
Overview of CICA's Information Technology Control Guidelines.
Discussant's Comments on Presentations by John Lainhart and Gerald Trites.
Discussion of Information Technology-Related Activities of Internal Auditors.
Reply to Discussion of Information Technology-Related Activities of Internal Auditors.
An Analysis of the Market for Systems Reliability Assurance Services.
Discussion of An Analysis of the Market for Systems Reliability Assurance Services.
Discussion of An Analysis of the Market for Systems Reliability Assurance Services.
Reply to Discussion of An Analysis of the Market for Systems Reliability Assurance Services.
An Analysis of the Group Dynamics Surrounding Internal Control Assessment in Information Systems Audit and Assurance Domains.
Discussion of An Analysis of the Group Dynamics Surrounding Internal Control Assessment in Information Systems Audit and Assurance Domains.
Discussion of An Analysis of the Group Dynamics Surrounding Internal Control Assessment in Information Systems Audit and Assurance Domains.
Reply to Discussion of An Analysis of the Group Dynamics Surrounding Internal Control Assessment in Information Systems Audit and Assurance Domains.
Analysis of Design from a Community of Practice Dialogue: Negotiating the Meaning of Auditing Information System Development.
Cook Inlet Belugas.
Distribution of Belugas, in Cook Inlet, During June/ July 1993-2000.
Historic and Current Use of Lower Cook Inlet, Alaska, by Belugas.
Belgua, Distribution and Survey Effort in the Gulf of Alaska.
Abundance of Belugas, in Cook Inlet, Alaska, 1994-2000.
Beluga, Group Sizes in Cook Inlet, Alaska, Based on Observer Counts and Aerial Video.
Beluga Habitat Associations in Cook Inlet, Alaska.
Concentrations of Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCB's) Chlorinated Pesticides and Heavy Metals and Other Elements in Tissues of Belugas from Cook Inlet, Alaska.
Trends and Potential Interactions Between Pinnipeds and Fisheries of New England and the U.S. West Coast.
An Accounting of the Sources of Steller Sea Lion, Eumetopias jubatus, Mortality.
Trash, heat, and ash.
All aboard.
news & NOTES.
computing.
technology FOCUS.
new PRODUCTS.
GETTING PHYSICAL.
the quest for a better world.
Out of harm's way.
With built-in ice maker.
Making a match.
Tracking Africa's Inferno.
Syngas Europa.
Nowhere to hide.
The blacksmith's motor.
News & notes.
Computing.
Technology focus.
From trash to cash.
Relief for weary bones.
NEWS & NOTES.
computing.
technologyFOCUS.
The Great Cosmic Battle.
A Partner-Approach to Astronomy Education: Project ASTRO the Tucson Way.
High-Energy Neutrino Astronomy: First Light at the South Pole.
Discover the International Astronomical Union.
The Heavens From a Watchtower.
The ASP Awards.
PROWLING FOR PLANETS.
WELCOME TO THE 21ST CENTURY, ARTHUR C. CLARKE.
Prospects for an Interstellar Mission: Hard Technology Limits but Surprising Physics Possibilites.
The Journey to Algol.
The Little Twisters' Impact: Dust Devils on Mars.
Asteroids--Points and Stones.
For Better or Worse: Reflections of an Eclipse-Chasing Family.
Twinkle-Free Stars: Astronomical Imaging Without Atmospheric Blurring.
Astronomy from the Moon: A Second Look.
Following A New Path Along the Search for Life in the Solar System.
The Dance of the Galaxies: The Young-Universe Ball.
Daniel Kirkwood--`Dean of American Astronomers'.
THE END OF ASTRONOMY?
The Nebula in Our Own Backyard.
Stargazing Secrets of Kitt Peak.
The Beauty of Black Holes.
Recognizing Jupiter's Great Red Spot.
TURNING AN EAR TO THE HEAVENS.
How to Abhor the Void While Loving the Quantum Vacuum.
What is 29 Doradus?
The Narthex of San Marco and the Pangenetic Paradigm.
Attack and Counterattack: The Never-Ending Story of Hosts and Parasites.
THE PRICE OF SALT.
The Lemurs of Kirindy.
The Matses Inventory.
Almost Everything You Ever Wanted To Know About Digital Cameras.
A Few Adobe PHOTOSHOP Tips.
Some Thoughts on Microsoft Imager.
Asking for It.
News.
Feathered Fun in Florida.
The Amazing Lichen.
GHOST Bears.
The Twilight Zone.
High Speed Adventures.
Faces of the World.
News.
Crime Photography.
Join PSA in Albuquerque for the Tours of a Lifetime.
Nazareth 2000.
PETRA.
1999 WHO'S WHO in Photography.
Darjeeling Himalayan Paradise in the Clouds.
Outstanding Photographs From Young Photographers.
The Ancestral Family Album.
News.
Innovative Virginia WWTP Tries Cost-Effective Phased Isolation Ditches.
TECHNOLOGY FOCUS.
Water Quality Deterioration in Distribution Systems.
Products At Work.
Choosing the Right Disinfection Technology for a Municipal Drinking Water Plant: Part 1.
Shake, Rattle & Roll.
Making Yankee Doodle Dandy: Ground Storage Reservoir Restoration.
Compound Costs of Instrument Inaccuracies.
Sanitary District Rises to the Challenge.
Foreign Language Education: Responding to Modern Learners.
ESL Policy and Practice: A Linguistic Human Rights Perspective.
Language Teacher Education: The Challenge for the Twenty-First Century.
The Challenge of Foreign Language Teacher Preparation.
Collaboration, Computer Mediation, and the Foreign Language Writer.
On 'Chatting' in the Foreign Language Classroom.
German for Business and Economics.
Promoting Self-Regulation in Foreign Language Learners.
Helping Students Say How They Know What They Know.
Student-Led Parent-Teacher Conferences.
Improving Teacher-Student Relationships: What's Up with That?
Delving Deeper: Teaching Culture as an Integral Element of Second-Language Learning.
Cooperative Teaching: The Renewal of Teachers.
Crossing the Divide.
The Misdirection of Middle School Reform.
Lyceum 1511 and Mountain Crest High School.
Common Arguments about the Strengths and Limitations of Home Schooling.
Borrowed Voices.
Is School Choice a Mechanisms for Sustaining Change?
Does Your School Track the Suicidal Student?
The Regular Educator's Role in the Individual Education Plan Process.
Problem Solving in Middle-Level Geometry.
Dewey, Democracy, and Citizenship.
Technology's Tendency to Undermine Serious Study: A Cautionary Note.
Making Better Use of Technology by Creating a Personal Taxonomy of Instructional Media.
Using Technology to Prepare and Extend Field Trips.
Virtually in the Middle.
The Threaded Discussion Forum: A Case Study in Technology Integration.
Teaching Students to Critically Evaluate Web Pages.
Aesthetics and the Middle School Learner.
Enhancing the Self-Efficacy of Struggling Readers.
What I Hope for in My Children's Teachers.
The Impact of Community Colleges on the School-to-Work Transition: A Multilevel Analysis.
An Assessment of the Community College's Influence on the Relative Economic Development of a County.
Business Faculty Recruitment: The Effects of Full-Time Versus Part-Time Employment.
Informal Student-Faculty Interaction: Its Relationship to Educational Gains in Science and Mathematics Among Community College Students.
An Open Memo to Community College Faculty and Administrators.
ERIC Review: Issues in Global Education Initiatives in the Community College.
A COLLEGE GOES TO SCHOOL: THE HISTORY OF AN URBAN COLLABORATION.
COLLABORATION: THE FOUNDATION OF LEARNING IN THE FUTURE.
TECHNOLOGY IN THE CLASSROOM: LESSONS LEARNED THROUGH PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT.
THE BRONX SCHOOL DISTRICT'S QUEST TO HARNESS THE EDUCATIONAL POTENTIAL OF DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY.
URBAN STUDENTS CROSS THE DIGITAL DIVIDE THROUGH LAPTOP LEASING PROGRAM.
THE NATIONAL URBAN TECHNOLOGY CENTER AND THE BRONX COMMUNITY TECHNOLOGY CENTERS NETWORK.
REFLECTIONS ON A 10 YEAR DISTANCE LEARNING PROJECT: NYCLASSNET.
IDENTITY OF THE UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR IS FORMULATED OVER TIME REQUIRING SELF-DISCOVERY FOLLOWED BY BEING AN INTELLECTUAL SCHOLAR AND TEACHER.
THE LIE SCORE ON THE PDT SERVES AS AN INDEX FOR CREDITABILITY OF TEST TAKER AND TEST RESULTS.
JROTC CADETS IN LEADERSHIP TRAINING DISPLAY SIGNIFICANTLY HIGHER PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT THAN TYPICAL STUDENTS.
IMAGINATION: THE MISSING LINK IN CURRICULUM AND TEACHING.
GROWING A COMMUNITY OF HIGH QUALITY TEACHERS: AN URBAN PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT MIDDLE SCHOOL.
PROMOTING TEACHING AS A CAREER AMONG HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS THROUGH A FIELD-BASED TEACHER EDUCATION PROGRAM.
SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNING AND THE TEACHING OF GRAMMAR [1].
Designing Emotionally Sound Instruction-An Empirical Validation of the FEASP-Approach.
Who, What, How and Where the Typical Psychologist is...the Profession of Psychology Scale.
Latin Vocabulary Acquisition: An Experiment using Information-Processing Techniques of Chunking and Imagery.
Assessment: Lessons Learned from a Year Long Undergraduate Teacher Education Pilot Program.
Cross Age Tutoring: Alternatives to the Reading Resources Room for Struggling Adolescent Readers.
What Makes for a Quality Science Curriculum?
Analysis of State Standards for Paraprofessionals.
Impact of Multicultural Training on School Psychology and Education Students.
Internet-Based Instruction: A National Survey of Psychology Faculty.
Students' Reactions to Written Test Item Rebuttals.
Computer Anxiety and Performance: An Application of a Change Model in a Pedagogical Setting.
Toward a Psychosocial and Sociocultural Understanding of Achievement Motivation Among Latino Gang Members in U.S. Schools.
Comparing Canadian and United States High School Students on Cognitive Dissonance Test Scores.
Assessment, Geography, and the Student.
Development and Evaluation of a Web-based Classroom.
Comparison of Traditional and Nontraditional (Adult Education) Undergraduate Business Programs.
Bi-Modal Instructional Practices in Educational Psychology: Mentoring and Traditional Instruction.
The Effects of Parenting Styles and Childhood Attachment Patterns on Intimate Relationships.
Significant Variables Associated with Assertiveness Among Hispanic College Women.
Impact of Learning Strategies and Motivation on Performance: A Study in Web-Based Instruction.
How to Recognize and Counteract Student Inattentiveness in the Classroom.
Mentoring: The Components for Success.
An Approach to Functional Assessment in General Education Classroom Settings.
You Really Don't Know How Much It Hurts: Children's and Preservice Teachers' Reactions to Childhood Teasing.
School-based Aggression Prevention Programs for Young Children: Current Status and Implications for Violence Prevention.
Issues in Data-based Decision Making in Special Education: Introduction to the Special Series.
Setting Learning Expectations for Students with Disabilities.
The Potential for Empirically Based Estimates of Expected Progress for Students With Learning Disabilities: Legal and Conceptual Issues.
High Stakes Testing and Expected Progress Standards for Students with Learning Disabilities: A Five-year Study of One District.
Using Curriculum-based Measurements to Establish Growth Standards for Students with Learning Disabilities.
Effects of Testing Accommodations on Standardized Mathematics Test Scores: An Experimental Analysis of the Performances of Students With and Without Disabilities.
Descriptive Assessment Method to Reduce Overall Disruptive Behavior in a Preschool Classroom.
Elementary Children's School Friendship: A Comparison of Peer Assessment Methodologies.
Core Profiles of School-aged Examinees from the National Standardization Sample of the Comprehensive Test of Nonverbal Intelligence.
FISTFIGHTS AT THE MOSCOW CHORAL SYNAGOGUE: ETHNICITY AND RITUAL IN POST-SOVIET RUSSIA.
ENTEXTUALIZING FAMINE, RECONSTITUTING SELF: TESTIMONIAL NARRATIVES FROM IRELAND.
INTRODUCTION: THE ENVIRONMENT AS MASTER NARRATIVE: DISCOURSE AND IDENTITY IN ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONFLICT AND THE SOCIAL LIFE OF ENVIRONMENTAL SECURITY DISCLOSURE.
CHERNOBYL STORIES AND ANTHROPOLOGICAL SHOCK IN HUNGARY.
ENCOUNTERS WITH THE SUPER-CITIZEN: NEOLIBERALISM, ENVIRONMENTAL ACTIVISM, AND THE AMERICAN HERITAGE RIVERS INITIATIVE.
LIKE NIXON COMING TO CHINA: FINDING COMMON GROUND IN A MULTI-ETHNIC COALITION FOR ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE.
SITUATIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS: EXPLORATIONS IN INTERPRETIVE PRACTICE.
GETTING TO PERSUASION.
QUESTIONS IN CROSS-LINGUISTIC MEDICAL ENCOUNTERS: THE ROLE OF THE HOSPITAL INTERPRETER.
NEGOTIATED AND MEDIATED MEANINGS: ETHNICITY AND POLITICS IN ISRAELI NEWSPAPERS.
DIVINING TROUBLES, OR DIVINING TROUBLES? EMERGENT AND CONFLICTUAL DIMENSIONS OF BANGLADESH DIVINATION.
GETTING TO THE STORY: UNWRITEABLE DISCOURSE AND INTERPRETIVE PRACTICE IN AMERICAN JOURNALISM.
The Dynamics of Commodity Spot and Futures Markets: A Primer.
Adelman's Rule and the Petroleum Firm.
An Analysis of Market Power Mitigation Strategies in Colorado's Electricity Industry.
Uncertainties in Responding to Climate Change: On the Economic Value of Technology Policies for Reducing Costs and Creating Options.
Self-Sufficient Energy Supply for Isolated Communities: Wind-Diesel Systems in the Canary Islands.
How Plausible is the Consensus Projection of Oil Below $25 and Persian Gulf Oil Capacity and Output Doubling by 2020.
Analyzing California's Power Crisis.
The Kyoto Protocol: Regional and Sectoral Contributions to the Carbon Leakage.
Lifting the Alaskan Oil Export Ban: An Intervention Analysis.
Economic Indicators of Market Transformation: Energy Efficient Lighting and EPA's Green Lights.
INTRODUCED WRITING AND CHRISTIANITY: DIFFERENTIAL ACCESS TO RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE AMONG THE ASABANO.
BEAN-CURD CONSUMPTION IN HONG KONG.
ROMANCE, PARENTHOOD, AND GENDER IN A MODERN AFRICAN SOCIETY.
RECONSTRUCTING ETHNICITY: RECORDED AND REMEMBERED IDENTITY IN TAIWAN.
JEWISH CUISINE.
REVIEWING TWINSHIP IN AFRICA.
'THE DEMON SUPERSTITION': ABOMINABLE TWINS AND MISSION CULTURE IN ONITSHA HISTORY.
TWINSHIP AND JUVENILE POWER: THE ORDINARINESS OF THE EXTRAORDINARY.
POWERS, PROBLEMS, AND PARADOXES OF TWINSHIP IN NIGER.
TWINSHIP IN AN EKITI YORUBA TOWN.
Policy Perspectives on Workforce Issues and Care of Older People.
The Impact of Financing on Workforce Recruitment and Retention.
Direct-Care Healthcare Workers: You Get What You Pay For.
The Role of Older Workers in Caring for Older People in the Future.
Achieving Cultural Competence: The Challenge for Clients and Healthcare Workers in a Multicultural Society.
The Potential of Technology to Ease the Care Provider's Burden.
Research on Frontline Workers in Long-Term Care.
The Potential of Older Volunteers in Long-Term Care.
The Effects of Changing Values on the Provision of Long-Term Care.
Social Work's Response to the Growing Older Population.
Geriatric Nurse Practitioners: Vital to the Future of Healthcare for Elders.
Allied Health Workers and Care for Frail Elders in the Twenty-First Century.
A Couple's Journey with Alzheimer's Disease: The Many Face of Intimacy.
Twice Hidden: Older Gay and Lesbian Couples, Friends, and Intimacy.
Sharing Life Stories: Acts of Intimacy.
Take One Pet and Call Me in the Morning.
Electronic Media and the Ties That Bind.
THE GEOGRAPHER AS VOYEUR.
CONSERVATION'S RADICAL CENTER IN GEOGRAPHY.
BIODIVERSITY AND LAND-USE CHANGE IN THE AMERICAN MOUNTAIN WEST.
HALF A CENTURY OF CROPLAND CHANGE.
LAND-USE DYNAMICS BEYOND THE AMERICAN URBAN FRINGE.
THE UNIQUENESS OF THE AMERICAN RELIGIOUS LANDSCAPE.
MORMON COLONIAS OF CHIHUAHUA.
AFRICA IS COMING TO THE CAPE.
THE CLASSROOM AS THE FIELD FOR STUDYING GEOGRAPHICAL EDUCATION.
COUNTING FARMERS MARKETS.
ENGLISH AS INTERNATIONAL LANGUAGE IN GEOGRAPHY: DEVELOPMENT AND LIMITATIONS.
GEOGRAPHY AS MELODY IN MUTTUSVAMI DIKSHITA'S INDIAN MUSICAL WORKS.
GEOGRAPHICAL RECORD NOTE CHANGE IN AMERICA'S DAIRYLAND.
IN SEARCH OF A NAVAJO SACRED GEOGRAPHY.
REPORT ON GEOGRAPHY AND THE NEW ETHNOBIOLOGY.
ETHICAL DILEMMAS IN HOME HEALTH CARE: A Social Work Perspective.
VALUES UNDERLYING END-OF-LIFE DECISIONS: A Qualitative Approach.
ETHICAL ISSUES IN THE SOCIAL WORKER'S ROLE IN PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED SUICIDE.
SUCCESSFUL INTERPROFESSIONAL COLLABORATION ON THE HOSPICE TEAM.
HOARDING BY ELDERLY PEOPLE.
Cultural Competence versus Cultural Chauvinism: Implications for Social Work.
Ending Clinical Relationships with People with Schizophrenia.
A Call to Action: Patients' Access to Clinical Trials.
Clinical Trials: A Wider Lens.
Clinical Trials: A Wider Lens 2.
Clinical Trials: Opportunities and Responsibilities.
Life after a National Nightmare: Coping with Invisible Illness and Disability.
Social Workers' Role in Disease Management.
A Descriptive Analysis of Older Adults with HIV/AIDS in California.
Disclosure of HIV Status in The Workplace.
Health-Related Worries, Self-Image, and Life Outlooks of Long-Term Survivors of Childhood Cancer.
Family Caregiving and Traumatic Brain Injury.
The Experience of Deafened Adults: Implications for Rehabilitative Services.
Infant Mortality: A Reflection of the Quality of Health.
The Efficacy of Infusing Homework Assignments Into Traditional Physical Education Activity Classes.
Activity Preferences of Middle School Physical Education Students.
Enhancing Student Trust Through Peer Assessment in Physical Education.
How to Refer to People With Disabilities: A Primer for Laypeople.
Assessing Children: Negotiated Transactions.
Selecting Assistive Technology for Greater Independence.
Perspectives of Parents of Children Who Are Visually Impaired: Implications for the Field.
Policy Guidance on Educating Blind and Visually Impaired Students.
A Challenge to My Colleagues.
Beyond the Classroom: A Summer Transition Program for Blind and Visually Impaired Adolescents.
Selecting Blood Glucose Monitors for Individuals With Low Vision.
Springboard.
Rehabilitation Teaching of Adults in Groups.
The Experience of Living With and Using a Dog Guide.
Explaining Own and Others' Behavior in a Controversial Issue: Animal Experimentation.
Social Psychological Models of Choice Behavior and Drivers' Left Turns.
Self-Esteem and Performance on Word Tasks.
Power and Gender Influences on Responsibility Attributions: The Case of Disagreements in Relationships.
Personality Attributes of Volunteers and Paid Workers Engaged in Similar Occupational Tasks.
Individual Versus Collective Responses to Membership in a Low-Status Group: The Effects of Stability and Individual Ability.
Gender and Speech Rate in the Perception of Competence and Social Attractiveness.
Social Categorization, Self-Esteem, and the Estimated Musical Preferences of Male Adolescents.
Ethnic Attitudes in Relation to Ethnic Pride and Ethnic Differentiation.
Interactive Effects of Characteristics of Defendant and Mock Juror on U.S. Participants' Judgment and Sentencing Recommendations.
Helping Norms in Relation to Religious Affiliation.
Associations Between Religious Behavior and Attitude to Christianity Among Australian Catholic Adolescents: Scale Validation.
Social Judgment of Abortion: A Black-sheep Effect in a Catholic Sheepfold.
Relationships Between Drinking and Type of Practice Among U.S. Female and Male Attorneys.
Sex-Linked Carrying Styles and the Attribution of Homosexuality.
Horizontal and Vertical Individualism and Collectivism Among College Students in the United States, Taiwan, and Argentina.
Sources of Acute Stress, Cognitive Appraisals, and Coping Strategies Of Male and Female Child Athletes.
A Systematic Observation of Professional Top-level Youth Soccer Coaches.
Perceives Characteristics of Sports Categorized as Gender-Neutral, Feminine and Masculine.
Hockey Coaches' and Players' Perceptions of Aggression and the Aggressive Behavior of Players.
The Effect of Theoretically-based Imagery Scripts on Field Hockey Performance.
A Team-Building Intervention Program: Application and Evaluation with Two University Soccer Teams.
Cognitive Appraisals and Coping Strategies Following Acute Stress Among Skilled Competitive Male and Female Athletes.
Coping Strategies of Runners: Perceived Effectiveness and Match to Precompetitive Anxiety.
An Examination of NFL Fans' Computer Mediated BIRGing.
Qualitative Validation of a Model For Coping With Acute Stress in Sports.
Relationships Among Body Satisfaction, Social Physique Anxiety, and Eating Behaviors in Female Athletes and Exercisers.
Faculty Attitudes Toward Male Division II Student-Athletes.
Athletes' Perceptions of Social Support Provided by Their Head Coach, Assistant Coach, and Athletic Trainer, Pre-Injury and During Rehabilitation.
Achievement Goals Across the Lifespan.
Moral Reasoning and Achievement Motivation in Sport: A Qualitative Inquiry.
The Migrations of Arturo Schomburg: On Being Antillano, Negro, and Puerto Rican in New York 1891-1938.
Naturalization and United States Citizenship in Two Periods of Mass Migration: 1894-1930, 1965-2000.
The Battle Over the Cold Spring Dam: Farm-Village Conflict and Contested Identity among Rural German Americans.
LATINOS IN THE UNITED STATES: THEIR HISTORY AND RACIAL IDENTITY.
Kwanzaa: The Making of a Black Nationalist Tradition, 1966--1990.
Becoming 'White': Race, Religion and the Foundations of Syrian/Lebanese Ethnicity in the United States.
Becoming 'Spanish-American': Race and Rhetoric in New Mexico Politics, 1880-1928.
Francis LaFlesche and the World of Letters.
Vision and Revision: International Histories of American Art.
Imperial Designs of Political Philanthropy: A Study of Antebellum Accounts of Italian Liberalism.
Corporate Hand in Academic Glove: The New Management's Struggle for Academic Recognition--The Case of the Harvard Group in the 1920's.
American Feminist Theory.
The (Re)Shaping of Latino/Chicano Ethnicity through the Inclusion/Exclusion of Undocumented Immigrants: The Case of LULAC's Ethno-politics.
The Contributions of Beaumont to Democracy in America: His Analysis of Race Relations and Slavery.
Dancing Mothers The Chautauqua Movement in Twentieth-Century American Popular Culture.
Global Media and the Ambiguities of Resonant Americanism.
'Some Enchanted Evening'--Tuning In the Amazing Fifties, Switching Off the Elusive Decade.
The Ills of Limitation and the Evils of Disorientation: Perceptions of Post-WWII American Literature in the USSR/Russia.
Impeaching the President: Clinton and the Culture Clash, A View from India.
OIL, SANCTIONS, DEBT AND THE FUTURE.
AN ECONOMY IN DEBT TRAP: IRAQI DEBT 1980-2020.
THE REGIONAL AND DOMESTIC POLITICAL CONSEQUENCES OF SANCTIONS IMPOSED ON IRAQ, LIBYA AND SUDAN.
FOREIGN POLICY BY CATHARSIS: THE FAILURE OF U.S. POLICY TOWARD IRAQ.
RUSSIAN-IRAQI RELATIONS: A HISTORICAL AND POLITICAL ANALYSIS.
JAPAN-IRAQ RELATIONS: THE PERCEPTION GAP AND ITS INFLUENCE ON DIPLOMATIC POLICIES.
PETITION ON BEHALF OF THE CHILDREN OF IRAQ SUBMITTED TO THE UNITED NATIONS CHARGING PRESIDENT BUSH AND U.S. AUTHORITIES ACTIONS CONSTITUTE ACTS OF GENOCIDE.
MISSING: THE BIAS IMPLICIT IN THE ABSENT.
CONTROL AND RESISTANCE AT LOCAL-LEVEL INSTITUTIONS: A STUDY OF KAFR YASSIF'S LOCAL COUNCIL UNDER THE MILITARY GOVERNMENT.
THE LIMITS OF AN ALLIANCE: TURKISH-ISRAELI RELATIONS REVISITED.
CENTRIFUGAL TENDENCIES IN THE ALGERIAN CIVIL WAR.
Legacy of the Clinton-Gore Administration's China Policy.
A response to Ted Osius: Policy Legacy and Political Context in U.S. Relations with China.
China in Contemporary American Geopolitical Imagination.
A response to Andrew A. Latham: From the Contemporary American Geopolitical Imagination to a Contemporary American Geopolitical Strategy.
Chinese Perceptions of U.S. Power and Strategy.
A response to Yong Deng: Power, Perception, and the Cultural Lens.
U.S. Security Strategy for the Asia-Pacific Region.
A response to Derek J. Mitchell: Four Basic and Controversial Issues in the U.S.-Asian Relationship.
In Pursuit of Open Markets: U.S. Economic Strategy in the Asia-Pacific.
A response to Thomas G. Moore: Perils of a Pax Americana.
Appraising Democratic Developments in Postauthoritarian States: Thailand and Indonesia.
Consolidation of Democracy in Hong Kong under Chinese Sovereignty.
Changing Perceptions of India in the U.S. Congress.
The Political Economy of Pre- and Post- 1997 Hong Kong.
Misreading Each Other's Minds: Taipei, Beijing, and Washington.
Forging a Labor Market in Urban China: The Legacies of the Past and the Dynamics of Institutional Transformation.
Economic Restructuring in Singapore: A Reflection on Regional Security in Southeast Asia.
Mongolia's Status: The Case for a Unique Approach.
Taiwan's Future: Mongolia or Tibet?
How to Win Friends and Influence People: Japanese Economic Aid Linkage and the Kurile Islands.
The Sentry's Solitude.
Afghanistan, Graveyard of Empires.
Preparing for the Next Attack.
America's Real Russian Allies.
From Poster Child to Basket Case.
Will Chávez Lose His Luster?
The New Battle for Central America.
The Attack on Human Rights.
The Mirage of Mexican Guest Workers.
The Minister and the Terrorist.
The Greening of the WTO.
The Rise of the Brand State.
Toward Universal Education.
Doing Good While Doing Well.
The World Bank's Mission Creep.
Getting Debt Relief Right.
The Future of the American Pacifier.
Russia's Unformed Foreign Policy.
Japan, the Reluctant Reformer.
With a Friend Like Fox.
The Corporate Ethics Crusade.
RELIGION, AUTHORITY, AND IDENTITY: Intergenerational Politics, Ethnic Resurgence, and Respect in Chimborazo, Ecuador.
UNCERTAIN GAINS: Labor in Chile's New Export Sectors.
INSTITUTIONAL REFORM OF AGRICULTURE UNDER NEOLIBERALISM: The Impact of the Women's and Indigenous Movements.
TOWARDS AN ENVIRONMENTAL HISTORY OF THE AMAZON: From Prehistory to the Nineteenth Century.
EDITOR'S FOREWARD.
SOVEREIGN LIMITS AND REGIONAL OPPORTUNITIES FOR GLOBAL CIVIL SOCIETY IN LATIN AMERICA.
REINVENTING THE COMMUNAL TRADITION: Indigenous Peoples, Civil Society, and Democratization in Andean Ecuador.
THE PERUVIAN POPULATION CENSUS OF 1725-1740.
TWELFTH TRIENNIAL SYMPOSIUM OF AFRICAN ART, ST. THOMAS.
The Sainsbury African Galleries at the British Museum.
Writing Architecture.
The Mirror and the Tomb.
RE-DRESSING HISTORY.
UNDRESSING ETHNICITY.
ARTS OF AFRICA, ASIA, OCEANIA, AND THE AMERICAS.
First word.
Reflections on 'African Voices' at the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History.
Palo Monte Mayombe and Its Influence on Cuban Contemporary Art.
FRAGMENTS.
Contemporary Vodun Arts of Ouidah, Benin.
SPECTACULAR DISPLAY.
'Authentic/Ex-Centric' at the Venice Biennale.
Past Presents: New Year's Gifts at the Valois Courts, ca. 1400.
God in the Details: Bosch and Judgment(s).
The Petite Commande of 1664: Burlesque in the Gardens of Versailles.
Blemished Physiologies: Delacroix, Paganini, and the Cholera Epidemic of 1832.
Reality, Unreality, and Virtual Reality.
Music Education Six Months after the Turn of the Century.
Music and Education in the Twenty-First Century: A Retrospective.
The General Education Challenge to Professional Degrees in Music.
Preventing Art Education from Becoming 'a Handmaiden to the Social Studies.'
The School Board, the Keyboard, the Arts, and the Peaceful Revolution.
Concerns and Considerations for Teacher Development in the Arts.
Arts Education and the American Campus: The Leadership Factor.
The Arts and Academic Achievement: What the Evidence Shows.
REAP: More than Fifteen Minutes?
The Harvard REAP Study: Inherent "versus" Instrumental Values.
Can the Arts Win Hearts and Minds?
Dance to Read or Dance to Dance?
The Perils and Parables of Research on Research.
RAYUELA'S CONFUSED HERMENEUTICS.
ERNESTINA DE CHAMPOURCÍN: A POET AND HER POETICS.
MI ECO MEJOR DE JUAN RAMÓN JIMÉNEZ: LOS INTERSTICIOS DE LA PALABRA POÉTICA.
QUEVEDO Y OLIVARES: UNA NOTA CRONOLÓGICA A SU EPISTOLARIO.
THE EXTRAORDINARY SURVIVAL OF SPANISH VEÍA: ANOTHER FACET OF ANALOGY REVEALED.
BLOOD MOTHER/MILK MOTHER: BREASTFEEDING, THE FAMILY, AND THE STATE IN ANTONIO DE GUEVARA'S RELOX DE PRINCIPES (DIAL OF PRINCES).
THE END OF ERENDIRA'S PROSTITUTION.
ROJAS'S CELESTINA AND CLAUDINA: IN SEARCH OF A WITCH.
GENDER, EMPIRE AND REVOLUTION IN LA VICTORIA DE JUNIN.
PARTIAL GLIMPSES OF THE INFINITE: BORGES AND THE SIMULACRUM.
THE POLITICS OF HUSBAND-MURDER: GENDER, SUPPLEMENTARITY AND SACRIFICE IN LOPE DE VEGA'S LA REINA JUANA DE NAPOLES.
CREATIVE THINKING IN MUSIC.
A PERSONAL RETROSPECTIVE ON THE MMCP.
GUIDELINES FOR COACHING STUDENT COMPOSERS.
DEVELOPING IMPROVISATION IN GENERAL MUSIC CLASSES.
TOOLS FOR THINKING IN SOUND.
MUSIC FOR LIFE.
ASSESSING A CAST OF THOUSANDS.
WILLIAM SCHUMAN'S LEGACY FOR MUSIC EDUCATION.
CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT FOR ENSEMBLES.
MENC TODAY.
ORFF-SCHULWERK IN THE NEW MILLENNIUM.
REEVALUATING COMMON KODALY PRACTICES.
PLANNING THE PERFECT CHORAL REHEARSAL.
NETWORKING THROUGH INTERNATIONAL TOURS.
BEATING TIME: HOW NOT TO MAKE MUSIC.
THREE WAYS TO PRACTICE MORE CREATIVELY.
REFLECTIONS OF BEGINNING MUSIC TEACHERS.
CHORAL MAINSTREAMING: TIPS FOR SUCCESS.
MENC TODAY.
CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT.
THE SCHOOL ENSEMBLE.
CREATIVE ACtiVITIES FOR STRING STUDENTS.
ENHANCING LEARNING IN THE CHORAL REHEARSAL.
DESIGNING SUBSTANTIVE PLAYING TESTS--A MODEL.
GENERATING A THEORY OF MUSIC INSTRUCTION.
IDEA BANK.
Conventions of Children's Literature: Then and Now.
Enfranchising the Child: Picture books, Primacy, and Discourse.
Partners in Crime: E. Nesbit and the Art of Thieving.
The Changing Aesthetics of Character in Children's Fiction.
Animal Carnivals: A Bakhtinian Reading of C.S. Lewis's 'The Magician's Nephew' and P.L. Traveler's 'Mary Poppins'
Reading in the Dark: Cognitivism, Film Theory, and Radical Interpretation.
Fabula and Fictionality in Narrative Theory.
Toward a Cognitive Theory of Literary Character: The Dynamics of Mental-Model Construction.
LitCrit or LitLit?
'Measure for Measure': Chiasmus, Justice, and Mercy.
'What Music Lies in the Cold Print': Larkin's Experimental Metric.
DECONSTRUCTING THE METANARRATIVE: AMOS OZ'S EVOLVING DISCOURSE WITH THE BIBLE.
THE NATURAL AND THE SUPERNATURAL IN ZOLA'S THÉRÈSE RAQUIN.
MAKING THE SHADOW CONSCIOUS: THE ENDURING LEGACY OF GASTON LEROUX.
THE PATIENT ANT AND THE FOOLISH GRASSHOPPER: JOHN UPDIKE'S ELABORATION ON LA FONTAINE.
GOLEM! THE MAKING OF A MODERN MYTH.
A WOMAN'S CHOICE: DUTY AND DESIRE IN LA PRINCESSE DE CLEVES.
FLAUBERT'S 'BLAGUE SUPERIEURE': THE SECULAR WORLD OF 'MADAM BOVARY.'
HISTORICAL IMPOSTERS, FICTIONAL TRUTHS: 'LA PRINCESSE DE CLEVES'
POWER OF 12.
'Welcome to HELL.'
A Question of Faith.
Article 9, Take 3.
The Right Equation.
Case Clothed.
Defense Warnings. (cover story)
Legal Arsenal. (cover story)
PIECEMEAL Tort Reform. (cover story)
RAGE.
Self-Help Speeds Up.
Courting Tech Business.
Subjective Status.
A New Chapter.
Fitting in Fitness.
Crash AND Learn. (cover story)
What Clients Want.
WINDS of CHANGE.
Tax Relief at Every Milestone.
UNDER Covered.
Funding the Future.
Building a Niche from Scratch.
Learning How to Ad.
DetourD to ADR.
Law in the Vast Lane.
LAW in the Low Country. (cover story)
The IN CROWD.
Private PROPERLY.
Secret SWAY.
Image on Four Wheels.
BIOTECHNOLOGY, FOOD, AND AGRICULTURE DISPUTES OR FOOD SAFETY AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE.
DISCUSSION FOLLOWING THE REMARKS OF MS. COFFIELD AND MR. FRECHETTE.
CROSS-BORDER CANADA/U.S. COOPERATION IN INVESTIGATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
DISCUSSION FOLLOWING THE REMARKS OF MS. VALENTINE AND MR. VON FINCKENSTEIN.
INTRODUCTION: TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND CULTURE: TRANSBORDER FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OR CULTURAL IDENTITY?
TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND CULTURE: TRANSBORDER FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OR CULTURAL IDENTITY?
TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND CULTURE: TRANSBORDER FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OR CULTURAL IDENTITY?
DISCUSSION FOLLOWING THE REMARKS OF MR. LOEB AND MR. STEIN.
LOOKING AHEAD: COMMON INSTITUTIONS OR MUDDLING THROUGH?
DISCUSSION FOLLOWING THE REMARKS OF MR. SMITH.
RANDOM COMMENTS.
JANE JACOBS'S CRITIQUE OF ZONING: FROM EUCLID TO PORTLAND AND BEYOND.
'A RIVER (AND $5 BILLION OF TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE) RUNS THROUGH IT': SUSTAINABILITY SLOUCHES TOWARD SOMERVILLE'S WATERFRONT.
CARRYING CAPACITY AND THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: ESTABLISHING AND DEFENDING LIMITS TO GROWTH.
BEYOND AND BELOW THE NEW URBANISM: CITIZEN PARTICIPATION AND RESPONSIVE SPATIAL RECONSTRUCTION.
PRIVATIZING CREATION OF THE PUBLIC REALM: THE FRUITS OF NEW YORK CITY'S INCENTIVE ZONING ORDINANCE.
EXPANDING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE MASSACHUSETTS COMPREHENSIVE PERMIT LAW BY ELIMINATING ITS SUBSIDY REQUIREMENT.
POLICE POWER AND THE PUBLIC TRUST: PRESCRIPTIVE ZONING THROUGH THE CONFLATION OF TWO ANCIENT DOCTRINES.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS: CONTRACTING FOR VESTED RIGHTS.
CONTROL OF HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTION.
Revisions to international bank solvency standards: A UK supervisory perspective
The Protection of Children and the Quest for Truth and Justice in Sierra Leone.
Toward Mediating the Impact of Forced Migration and Displacement Among Children Affected by Armed Conflict.
Child Labor: Myths, Theories and Facts.
Children Falling into the Digital Divide.
Eight Is Too Late: Investment in Early Childhood Development.
DIFFERING APPROACHES TO COMBATING CHILD ABUSE: UNITED STATES VS. UNITED KINGDOM.
Eradicating Pedophilia: Toward the Humanization of Society.
Intercountry Adoption: A Global Problem or a Global Solution.
Unraveling Child Labor and Labor Legislation.
The Rise and Decline of Rogue States.
What's in a Name? The Changing Foreign Policy Lexicon.
Afghanistan: Ending the Policy Quagmire.
Burma: US Foreign Policy as Morality Play.
China and the United States: Who Threatens Whom?
Iran: No Easy Answers.
COST-BENEFIT DEFAULT PRINCIPLES.
SHOULD THE LAW IGNORE COMMERCIAL NORMS? A COMMENT ON THE BERNSTEIN CONJECTURE AND ITS RELEVANCE FOR CONTRACT LAW THEORY AND REFORM.
FOREWORD: FROM MIRANDA TO...3501 TO DICKERSON TO...
THE PATHS NOT TAKEN THE SUPREME COURT'S FAILURES IN DICKERSON.
MIRANDA, DICKERSON, AND THE PUZZLING PERSISTENCE OF FIFTH AMENDMENT EXCEPTIONALISM.
MIRANDA, THE CONSTITUTION, AND CONGRESS.
FOREWORD: ON ACADEMIC FADS AND FASHIONS.
Our New Nonpolitical Order: The Eros of Enterprise. An Essay on Dinesh D'Souza's The Virtue of Prosperity.
What Tocqueville Says to Liberals and Conservatives Today.
Liberty, Equality, Nobility: Kolnai, Tocqueville, and the Moral Foundations of Democracy.
The Modern Revolution and the Collapse of Moral Analogy: Tocqueville and Guizot.
Tocqueville on Pantheism, Materialism, and Catholicism.
On the Academic Discipline of 'Political Science.'.
A Cinematic Call for Self-Knowledge: An Interpretation of Miller's Crossing.
Grade Inflation, Democracy, and the Ivy League.
Enlightenment, Impartial Spectators, and Griswold's Smith.
Whose Context? Which Impartiality? Reflections on Griswold's Smith.
Anti-antifoundationalism: Is a Theory of Moral Sentiments Possible?
Eros and Modernity, or Sympathy and Nihilism.
Reply to My Critics.
On the Degeneration of Public Philosophy in America: Problems and Prospects.
Constitutionalism, the Public Philosophy, and Political Science.
The American Crisis of Public Philosophy and Political Science as a Discipline.
Korea and the Dynamics of Japan's Post-Cold War Security Policy.
The Relevance of Perceptions in Foreign Policy: A German-U.S. Perspective.
U.S. Domestic Politics and the Emerging Humanitarian Intervention Policy: Haiti, Bosnia, and Kosovo.
The Social and Economic Correlates of Islamic Religiosity.
Anti-Western Nationalism in China, 1989-99.
The Road to Peace?
The Politics of Reconciliation Revisited: Germany and East-Central Europe.
Transnational Migration: A Challenge to European Citizenship Regimes.
Russian Attitudes toward America: A Split between the Ruling Class and the Masses.
The Problem with Foreign Military Sales Reinvention.
On being a happy surgeon.
Malignancy of the larynx in a child.
Effectiveness of the ultrasonic harmonic scalpel for tonsillectomy.
Unilateral versus bilateral neck exploration in parathyroid surgery: An assessment of 55 cases.
Intra- and intersession reliability of acoustic rhinometry in measuring nasal cross-sectional area.
Evaluation of post-tonsillectomy bleeding in the adult population.
Cost-effectiveness of two types of dysphagia care in head and neck cancer: A preliminary report.
Malignant fibrous histiocytoma arising in the upper posterior triangle of the neck.
Chondrosarcoma of the larynx: A therapeutic challenge.
Detection of sinus-induced orbital mycosis with standardized orbital ultrasonography: A case report.
Stapes mobilization in otosclerosis.
Use of the malleus handle as a landmark for localizing the round window membrane.
Superficial leiomyosarcoma of the head and neck: Case report and review of the literature.
Granular cell tumor of the parotid: A case report and literature review.
Nasal T-cell lymphoma: Case report and review of diagnostic features.
A rare case of renal cell carcinoma metastatic to the sinonasal area.
A neurilemmoma of the parotid gland: Report of a case.
Post-tympanostomy tube otorrhea.
Surgery for chronic ear disease.
Chronic external otitis.
Use of adenoidectomy and adenotonsillectomy in children with otitis media with effusion.
Sudden hypoacusis treated with hyperbaric oxygen therapy: A controlled study.
The Distal Impact of Two First-Grade Preventive Interventions on Conduct Problems and Disorder in Early Adolescence.
Facilitating General Education Participation for Students with Behavior Problems by Linking Positive Behavior Supports and Person-Centered Planning.
Understanding the Use of Mental Health Placements by the Juvenile Justice System.
The Utility of a DSM-IV--Referenced Screening Instrument for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.
Child Strengths and the Level of Care for Children with Emotional and Behavioral Disorders.
Placement Disruption in Treatment Foster Care.
Longitudinal Use of the Teacher's Report Form in Tracking Outcome for Students with SED.
Using Behavior Rating Scales for ADHD Across Ethnic Groups: The IOWA Conners. (cover story)
The Efficacy of Phonological Awareness Training with First-Grade Students Who Have Behavior... (cover story)
Caseload Segregation/Integration and Service Delivery Outcomes for Children and Adolescents. (cover story)
Improving the Classroom Behavior of Students with Emotional and Behavioral Disorders Using... (cover story)
Academic Characteristics of Incarcerated Youth and Correctional Educational Programs: A... (cover story)
An Investigation of Relationships Between Social Behavior and ADHD in Children and Youth... (cover story)
Brownfields: A Case Study in Partnering with Residents to Develop an Easy-to-Read Print Guide.
Use and Barriers to Use of Laboratory Data by Clinical Dietitians.
Conceptual Blockbusters: Creative Idea Generation Techniques for Health Administrators.
The Manager and Pain Control for Patients.
Verbal Abuse of Female Nurses: An American Medical Form of Gender Apartheid?
Successful Collaboration Between Hospitals and Physicians: Process or Structure?
Satisfaction with HMO Coverage: An Empirical Study of a Medical School's Faculty, Staff, and Administrators.
Automation of Pharmacy Systems: Experiences and Strategies of a Rural Healthcare System.
Labor Unions and Employed Physicians: A Case History from the Private Sector.
The Balanced Scorecard in Healthcare Organizations: A Performance Measurement and Strategic Planning Methodology.
Uncircling the Wagons: Informing Patients about Unanticipated Outcomes.
The Evolving Effect of ERISA on Managed Care Liability.
Using the Analytic Hierarchy Process for the Selection of First-Year Family Practice Residents.
The Role of Business Impact Analysis and Testing in Disaster Recovery Planning by Health Maintenance Organizations.
A Trend Analysis of Hospitals with High Cash and Security Investments.
New Role for Managers: Increasing the Amount of Bad News.
Economic Health: The Key Ingredient in the Personal Health of Global Communities.
Gentamicin in pharmacogenetic approach to treatment of cystic fibrosis.
Identification of human-infective trypanosomes in animal reservoir of sleeping sickness in Uganda by means of serum-resistance-associated (SRA) gene.
Effect of passive smoking on respiratory symptoms, bronchial responsiveness, lung function, and total serum IgE in the European Community Respiratory Health Survey: a cross-sectional study.
Death by homicide, suicide, and other unnatural causes in people with mental illness: a population-based study.
Plasma concentration of asymmetrical dimethylarginine and mortality in patients with end-stage renal disease: a prospective study.
Sensitivity of a clinical examination to predict need for radiography in children with ankle injuries: a prospective study.
Newly diagnosed idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura in childhood: an observational study.
Ghana: defining the African challenge.
Coroner Wakley: two remarkable eyewitness accounts.
How the heart was held in medieval art.
Charles Dickens: a neglected diagnosis.
Cineplasty as a control input for externally powered prosthetic components.
Mechanical performance of inflatable inserts used in limb prosthetics.
The effect of body weight and age on frequency of repairs in lower-limb prostheses.
The effects of tibial rotation on the patellofemoral joint: Assessment of the changes in in situ strain in the peripatellar retinaculum and the patellofemoral contact pressures and areas.
Design and validation of an instrument package designed to increase the reliability of ankle range of motion measurements.
Microstructural characteristics of human skin subjected to static versus cyclic pressures.
State-of-the-art methods for geometric and biomechanical assessments of residual limbs: A review.
Influence of training on biomechanics of wheelchair propulsion.
Performance of an intramuscular electrode during functional neuromuscular stimulation for gait training post stroke.
A reusable, self-adhesive electrode for intraoperative stimulation in the lower limbs.
Selectivity of intramuscular stimulating electrodes in the lower limbs.
Effects of stimulated hip extension moment and position on upper-limb support forces during FNS-induced standing--A technical note.
Comparison of two computer-automated procedures for tinnitus pitch matching.
Reliability of hearing thresholds: Computer-automated testing with ER-4B Canal Phone earphones.
Modified constraint induced therapy: A randomized feasibility and efficacy study.
Pulmonary function testing in spinal cord injury: Effects of abdominal muscle stimulation.
Percentage Plans and College Admissions.
The Politics of Admissions in California.
What Throckmorton P. Wallow Hath Wrought.
Charting a New Course for CUNY.
An Apologia for Ed Schools.
Barriers to Sound Teaching.
Toward Pluralism in Education.
Henry Giroux's Pedagogy of the Oppressed.
Lionel Trilling and the Barbarians at the Gate.
Race-Neutral Schemes for Diversity.
Law School Admissions, LSATs, and the Bar.
How to Hire Better Professors.
Toward Genuine Self-Government.
Aristotle Visits City College.
Acknowledgments: An Academic Ritual.
On Institutional Faithfulness.
The Public Intellectual and the American University.
Happy Trails to All.
Why Smart People Believe in God.
The Diamonds of Neptune.
Birding in the Dark.
Getting to Roger.
The Anti-Jefferson.
Ohio States.
Van.
The Case of Thomas Carlyle.
The Come As You Are Not Party.
Emerson's Emancipation Proclamations.
Presence: Frank Bidart.
Portrait of an Artist.
Martin Scoresese and the Film between the Living and the Dead.
The Memory Boom in Contemporary Historical Studies.
Lincoln's Constitutional Necessity.
Modernist Poetics and Fascism: The Caliph's Design.
Eugenic Danger or Genetic Promise: A Revolution for the Millennium.
Alma De'atei, The-World-That-Is-Coming: reflections on Power, Knowledge, Wisdom, and Progress.
Intimations of the Great Unlearning: Interreligious Spirituality and the Demise of Consciousness Which Is Alzheimer's.
Vedanta: Death and the Art of Dying.
Understanding Suffering and Compassion.
The Responsible Body: A Eucharistic Community.
The Sky So Blue: Wilderness and the Art of Introduction.
Violence in Christian Theology.
The Violence of God: Dialogic Fragments.
Jephthah's Daughter.
Blood & Stone: Violence in the Bible & the Eye of the Illustrator.
Notes on God's Violence.
Devoured by God: Cannibalism, Mysticism, and Ethics in Simone Weil.
The Precarious Ties That Bind Us: Sotah 2a.
EXTREME Measures.
Chronicle of a Protest.
On the Front Lines at the FTAA Protests.
PLAN COLUMBIA: The Hidden Front in the U.S. Drug War.
Beyond the Quest for Certainty.
H.P. LOVECRAFT Prophet of Humanism.
The Virtue of the Weaponed Hero.
WHO IS OSAMA BIN LADEN?
The Globalization of a Movement.
An Ode to Maxy Noble.
HYDROGEN as the WAY toward Sustainability.
THE POSITIVE Virtues OF Physician-assisted Suicide.
Another Theocracy: The Ties That Bind.
RELIGION, POLITICS, and the Fear of Whole Language Education.
The New Dawn of the Student Revolution.
Animal Research. (cover story)
Sacred Texts: The Myth of Historical Literalism.
Humanist Values, Brain Science, and 'Mind-Reading.'
PROBABILITY AS A GUIDE IN LIFE.
DIRECT INFERENCE AND THE PROBLEM OF INDUCTION.
THE EVOLUTION OF CULTURE.
OXFORD AND THE 'EPIDEMIC' OF ORDINARY LANGUAGE PHILOSOPHY.
SOCIAL ROUTES TO BELIEF AND KNOWLEDGE.
INFECTIOUS IDEAS: SOME PRELIMINARY EXPLORATIONS.
PURPOSES AND CROSS-PURPOSES: ON THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGES AND LANGUAGE.
SCRIBES AND TEXTS: A TEST CASE FOR MODELS OF CULTURAL TRANSMISSION.
CONSTITUTIVE RULE SYSTEMS AND CULTURAL EPIDEMIOLOGY.
Body Image Preference in the United States and Rural Thailand: An Exploratory Study.
An Exploratory Study on the Career Anchors of Educators in Singapore.
A Participatory Conversation about How the Universe, Our Lives, and Science Are Participatory.
A Cooperative Inquiry into Deep Ecology.
Free Lunches, Yes; Free Markets, No.
Participate, Collaborate, Integrate.
Talking with Trees.
Participation, in Writing, Carving, and Teaching.
A Four-Day Feast of Conversation at the Fetzer Institute.
'Fall Down Seven, Get Up Eight'.
Listening to One Another's Lives and Disciplines.
Quantum Entanglement with the Nonliving World.
Participation in the Living World.
The Mutual Entanglement of Strangers in the Human World.
The Cosmic World How We Participate in Thee and Thou in Us.
THE CASE OF CONJOINED TWINS: EMBODIMENT, INDIVIDUALITY, AND DEPENDENCE.
JEAN-PIERRE TORRELL'S RESEARCH ON THOMAS AQUINAS.
HAS THE CONGREGATION FOR THE DOCTRINE OF THE FAITH EXCEEDED ITS AUTHORITY?
HUMAN EMBRYONIC STEM CELL THERAPY.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF YVES CONGAR'S THEOLOGY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.
BERNARD LONERGAN AND MYSTICISM.
LABEX.
ATTACK on Giant Salvinia. (cover story)
More Troublesome Water Weeds Targeted by Researchers.
Forcing Exotic, Invasive Insects Into Retreat: New IPM Program Targets Hawaii's Fruit Flies.
Scientists Sharpen Strategies To Sabotage Glassy-Winged Sharpshooter.
Beltsville Agricultural Research Center.
Rainfall Simulators Target Runoff.
Motivation in U.S. Narrative Accounts of the Ground War in Vietnam.
Army Officers' Spouses: Have the White Gloves Been Mothballed?
De Guatemala a Guate-Peor? Guatemalan Military Interventionism, 1944-1970.
Strategic Culture and the Military Modernization of South Korea.
The Privatization of Security.
Political Partisanship and the Military Ethic in America.
Patterns in Liberal Democratic Civil-Military Relations.
Homosexuality and the Israel Defense Forces: Did Lifting the Gay Ban Undermine Military Performance?
Adjusting to Peace: Military Values in a Cross-National Comparison.
Reform and Crisis in Romanian Civil-Military Relations 1989-1999.
BIOCYCLE WORLD.
REGIONAL ROUNDUP.
GEORGIA BUILDS POULTRY LITTER COMPOSTING INFRASTRUCTURE.
COMPOST KEY IN GRAVEL PIT RECLAMATION.
ON-SITE COMPOSTING OF MEAT PROCESSING RESIDUALS.
TESTING FEASIBILITY OF HOUSEHOLD FOOD RESIDUALS DIVERSION.
ASSESSING FOOD RESIDUALS RECYCLING POTENTIAL IN NEW JERSEY.
BIOCYCLE WORLD.
REGIONAL ROUNDUP.
COMMERCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE TAKES SHAPE FOR ANAEROBIC DIGESTION.
GREEN BUILDING SHINES IN ATLANTA.
ISLAND OPERATION STUDIES C&D RESIDUALS FOR REUSE.
USING WOODY MATERIALS FOR EROSION CONTROL.
ENHANCED FABRICS SPUR COMPOSTING INNOVATIONS.
Building Organic Matter Into Florida's Sandy Soils.
ADVANCES IN COMPOSTING CONTAMINATED SOILS.
BIOSOLIDS, WOOD CHIPS KEY TO MINELAND RECLAMATION. (cover story)
BIOCYCLE WORLD.
REGIONAL ROUNDUP.
USING MSW AND INDUSTRIAL RESIDUES AS ETHANOL FEEDSTOCKS.
REVITALIZING THE FARM ECONOMY VIA RENEWABLE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT.
A ROUGH GUIDE TO ANAEROBIC DIGESTION COSTS AND MSW DIVERSION.
ANAEROBIC DIGESTION FACILITIES IN SWITZERLAND.
COMPOSTING YARD TRIMMINGS AND FOOD RESIDUALS FOR GREATER DIVERSION.
HAULER, COMPOSTER PARTNERSHIP SUCCEEDS IN DIVERTING FOOD RESIDUALS.
PROTECTIVE PRACTICES AT GRINDING, SCREENING OPERATIONS.
Air Handling Holds Key To Odor Management.
Testing Compost Value On Pepper Transplants.
Comparison Between In-Vessel And Turned Pile Composting Systems.
BioCycle World.
Regional Roundup.
DECENTRALIZED TREATMENT AND RECYCLING DOMESTIC WASTEWATER.
ALTERNATIVE ON-SITE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS.
COMPARING RECYCLING PROGRAMS IN MAJOR U.S. CITIES.
MOBILE EQUIPMENT FITS PERFECTLY ON MULTIPLE SITES. (cover story)
NEW FRONTIERS FOR ODOR RESEARCH.
Air Separation Strategies Tackle Plastics Contamination.
ORGANICS RECYCLING INITIATIVES SPAWNED BY SALMON RECOVERY.
Perils and Promise of Privately Owned Protected Areas.
The Consequences of Citing Hedged Statements in Scientific Research Articles.
Resurrecting the Dammed: A Look at Colorado River Restoration.
Declining Biodiversity: Why Species Matter and How Their Functions Might Be Restored in Californian Tidal Marshes.
Defining and Unraveling Biocomplexity.
Lichens: The Interface between Mycology and Plant Morphology. (cover story)
Whale Origins as a Poster Child for Macroevolution.
Statistical Significance Tests: Equivalence and Reverse Tests Should Reduce Misinterpretation.
Modeling the Spatial Transition Probabilities of Landscape Dynamics in an Amazonian Colonization Frontier.
Designs for Evaluating Local and Regional Scale Trends.
Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World: A New Map of Life on Earth.
The Propagation of Ecological Influences through Heterogeneous Environmental Space.
Host Range Testing of Insects for Biological Weed Control: How Can It Be Better Interpreted?
'World Enough, and Time': A Global Investment for the Environment.
A Burning Interest in Boreal Forests: Researchers in Alaska Link Fires with Climate Change.
Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi: More Diverse than Meets the Eye, and the Ecological Tale of Why. (cover story)
The Politics of Environmental Education.
The NatureMapping Program: Resource Agency Environmental Education Reform.
A Comment on 'The Adventures of Lead Commander: An Environmental Education Program to Prevent Lead Poisoning in Young Children.'
Stake's Countenance Model: Evaluating an Environmental Education Professional Development Course.
Level of Teacher Preparation and Implementation of EE: Mandated and Non-Mandated EE Teacher Preparation States.
Turning Minds On and Faucets Off: Water Conservation Education in Jordanian Schools.
Improving Risk Education in Grades 6-12: A Needs Assessment of Michigan, Ohio, and Wisconsin Science Teachers.
SPECTRUM.
Managing Hazardous Materials along the U.S.-Mexico Border.
Food for All in the 21st Century.
Promise or Peril?
Water Science and Technology.
Understanding Why Governments in Developing Countries Waste Natural Resources.
Building Trust.
Flaws in the Conventional Wisdom on Acid Deposition.
Power Switch.
The Next Unseen Revolution.
Reducing Waste.
COMMENTARY.
SPECTRUM.
DISCLOSURE OF TOXIC RELEASES IN THE UNITED STATES. (cover story)
Model studies of the structures, reactivities, and reaction mechanisms of metalloenzymes.
DFT-based molecular dynamics as a new tool for computational biology: First applications and perspective.
Quantum crystallography, a developing area of computational chemistry extending to macromolecules.
Review of technology for 157-nm lithography.
PREVAIL--Electron projection technology approach for next-generation lithography.
Recent progress in electron-beam resists for advanced mask-making.
TCAD development for lithography resolution enhancement.
Chemical and physical aspects of the post-exposure baking process used for positive-tone chemically amplified resists.
Dissolution behavior of chemically amplified resist polymers for 248-, 193-, and 157-nm lithography.
Printing meets lithography: Soft approaches to high-resolution printing.
A User's Willingness to Adopt a New Information System: The Influence of the Decision-Making Improvements and Performance-Monitoring Dimensions of the System.
The Impact of Unit Goal Priorities: Economic Incentives, and Interim Feedback on the Planned Effort of Information Systems Professionals.
The Relevance of Transformational Leadership to Nontraditional Accounting Services: Information Systems Assurance and Business Consulting.
Accounting Information Systems Doctoral Dissertations: 2000.
Market Reactions to ERP Implementation Announcements.
A Blueprint for an AIS Consulting Course.
Developing Database Query Proficiency: Assuring Compliance for Responses to Web Site Referrals.
Pushing productivity.
Basic drives.
Heat out of small packages.
Preaching to the converted.
ASME International: ANNUAL REPORT 2000-2001.
The ASME Foundation: Annual Report 2000-2001.
news& NOTES.
computing.
technology FOCUS.
new PRODUCTS.
Fresh air, wide-open space. (cover story)
Shake, Rattle, and Roll.
NECESSARY TOOLS.
Making the cut.
The healing hand.
The 2000-2001 ASME Fellows...
news & NOTES.
technology FOCUS.
Little Big El-Mo.
More motor muscle.
Light for the Future. (cover story)
Solar Gains.
EXPERT BUILT-IN.
Ready for the STORM.
Collecting Cosmic Dust.
Meteorite Field Guide.
Pas de Deux.
LIGO: Hearing the Gravitational-Wave Universe.
HOW THE SUN SHINES.
American Icon.
What Do Females Want?
IN DEFENSE OF CATERPILLARS.
TO WIPE AND WAX.
SYMBIONTS AND ASSASSINS.
Young Naturalist Awards 2000.
A Star Is Born.
LIFE ON A LEAF.
Us and Them.
Novel Heavy-Water Detector Unveils the Missing Solar Neutrinos.
Atoms Hop between Islands of Regular Motion in a Sea of Chaos.
Experiments Detail How Powerful Ultrashort Laser Pulses Propagate through AIr.
A PHASE ODYSSEY.
TURBULENT HEAT FLOW: STRUCTURES AND SCALING.
COMMUNICATION IN A DISORDERED WORLD.
TWO REVOLUTIONS IN K-8 SCIENCE EDUCATION.
NEW PRODUCTS.
OBITUARIES.
Come to San Diego!
Shooting Venice When It Drizzles.
News.
Digital Film.
Land of Cones.
Photographing Alaska's BROWN BEARS.
The Lowdown on Scanners for Digital Imaging.
News.
Self-Assignments.
The Line of Beauty.
News.
Puffins of Machias Seal Island.
News.
Land of Joy... Land of Tragedy.
West Virginia.
Touring the Russian North.
News.
PSA PLANS EXCITING TOURS OF SAN DIEGO!
Sensitivity, Creativity, & Activity.
Basics of Underwater Stereo Photography.
Prints for the Stereoscope from Your Computer.
News.
Who's Who 2000. (cover story)
News.
A Day of TERROR.
TEXTURE TECHNIQUES.
2001 PSA International Exhibition. (cover story)
Advanced Audio Techniques for Slide Projection Programs.
News.
Comments & Observations.
Awards & Honors Recipients.
The Irresistible Palouse Country of Washington State.
Young Photographers.
10 Years in Picture of the Month.
Ornate Bali.
News.
news notes.
Is Not Knop's Solution What It Seems.
COMPUTER NEWS.
CLASSROOM AIDS.
news notes.
Selecting Trade Books for Elementary Science Units.
COMPUTER NEWS.
CLASSROOM AIDS.
news notes.
COMPUTER NEWS.
CLASSROOM AIDS.
news notes.
COMPUTER NEWS.
CLASSROOM AIDS.
WASHINGTON NEWS.
Small Town Finds Big Technology Affordable.
Feasibility Study Proposes Inflatable Dam. (cover story)
Coping with Resistance to Copper/Silver Disinfection.
Biofouling in Raw Water Supply Wells and Its Impact.
Meeting the Challenge: Revitalizing the Las Vegas Wash.
Headworks: Removing Inorganics and Preventing Wear.
Technology Focus on Pipes and Tools.
Microwave Propagation Helps Measure Sludge Density.
Handling Student Fights.
Professional Development for a Literature-Based Middle School Curriculum.
Andy's Right to Privacy in Grading and the Falvo versus Owasso Public Schools Case.
Student Searches.
The Intersection of Language, Education, and Content.
Havighurst's Developmental Tasks, Young Adolescents, and Diversity.
Implementing a Character Education Curriculum and Assessing Its Impact on Student Behavior.
'Psst . . . Have You Heard about the International Baccalaureate Program?'
The Managerial Roles of Public Community College Chief Academic Officers.
Professional Development for Presidents: A Study of Community and Technical College Presidents in Three States.
Editor's Choice: Measuring Outcomes: Is the First-time, Full-time Cohort Appropriate for the Community College?
ERIC Review: Educating Immigrants: The Community College Role.
Identification and Assessment of Community College Peer Institution Selection Systems.
The Legislative Evolution of Performance Funding in the North Carolina Community College System.
Faculty Development in SACS-Accredited Community Colleges.
Using Survey and Focus Group Research to Learn About Parents' Roles in the Community College Choice Process.
ERIC Review: Issues in Developmental Education.
Using Segmentation Modeling to Predict Graduation at a Two-Year Technical College.
The Location of Developmental Education in Community Colleges: A Discussion of the Merits of Mainstreaming vs. Centralization.
Community College Leadership Preparation: Needs, Perceptions, and Recommendations.
ERIC Review: Exploring the Meaning of 'Nontraditional' at the Community College.
Democratic Leadership and Faculty Empowerment at the Community College: A Theoretical Model for the Department Chair.
Mission Priorities of Community Colleges in the Southern United States.
Community College Mentoring: Minority Student Perception.
ERIC Review: Learning Communities at the Community College.
HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES (HBCUS).
CELEBRATING DIVERSITY BY EDUCATING ALL STUDENTS: ELEMENTARY TEACHER AND PRINCIPAL COLLABORATION.
SPECIAL EDUCATION DIRECTORS AND THEIR COMPETENCIES ON CEC-IDENTIFIED SKILLS.
COMMENCEMENT ADDRESS TO COLLEGE GRADUATING STUDENTS.
ADDRESSING PERSONNEL CONCERNS ABOUT SCHOOL VIOLENCE THROUGH EDUCATION, ASSESSMENT AND STRATEGIC PLANNING.
ACADEMIC STAFF TURNOVER IN NIGERIAN UNIVERSITIES (1990-1997).
PROGYMNASTIA A SYNCHROMUS APPROACH TO INTERNET TEACHING.
SUCCESSFUL SCIENTIFIC INSTRUCTION INVOLVES MORE THAN JUST DISCOVERING CONCEPTS THROUGH INQUIRY-BASED ACTIVITIES.
PROMOTION AND TENURE DECISIONS USING THE BOYER MODEL.
DEVELOPING UNIVERSITY AND PUBLIC SCHOOL PARTNERSHIPS TO PROMOTE EXCELLENCE IN TEACHER EDUCATION.
EMPOWERING EARLY CHILDHOOD TEACHER TO KEEP TEACHING FRESH AS A LIFELONG LEARNER.
A STUDY OF STUDIES: CYBERSPACE COMMUNICATIONS.
ENSURING EXCELLENCE IN THE PREPARATION OF SPECIAL EDUCATORS THROUGH PROGRAM EVALUATION.
ADMINISTRATOR PERCEPTIONS OF BUSINESS SCHOOL ADVISORY BOARDS.
DEVELOPING A CARING ATTITUDE IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD PRE-SERVICE TEACHERS.
THE REAL CRISIS IN THE CLASSROOM: WHERE HAVE ALL THE TEACHERS GONE?
STATE CERTIFICATION/LICENSURE STANDARDS FOR EDUCATIONAL DIAGNOSTICIANS: A NATIONAL REVIEW.
STAKEHOLDERS' SURVEY FOCUSES LEADERSHIP SEARCH.
MEMORY IMPROVEMENT AND RESEARCH RELATED TO THE SCIENCE OF MEMORY.
BREAKING THE SCHOOL DISTRICT BOUNDARIES: COLLABORATION AND COOPERATION FOR SUCCESS.
LEADERSHIP IN ACTION: PILOTING A SCHOOL UNIFORM PROGRAM.
COUNSELING THE UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR ON THE SECURING OF RESEARCH GRANTS AND THE PUBLISHING OF RESEARCH PRODUCTS.
APPLICATION OF A WHOLETHEME PERSPECTIVE TO THE MOVEMENT APPROACH FOR TEACHING PHYSICAL EDUCATION IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS.
TRANSLATING CONSTRUCTIVIST THEORY INTO PRACTICE IN PRIMARY-GRADE MATHEMATICS.
ACCLIMATING INDUCTION TEACHERS TO LOW-PERFORMING SCHOOLS: ADMINISTRATORS' ROLE.
Elementary In-Service Teachers' Self-Regulated Learning Strategies Related to Their Academic Achievements.
Pre-service Teachers' Knowledge About Islam: A Snapshot Post September 11, 2001.
Use of Precorrection Strategies to Enhance Reading Performance of Students with Learning and Behavior Problems.
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: Implications for the Classroom Teacher.
What Can Online Course Components Teach About Improving Instruction and Learning?
An Alternative Model for Decision-Making.
Foreign Language Education in Post-Colonial English Speaking Caribbean.
A Knowledge Base for Cultural Diversity in Administrator Training.
Reliability Generalization: An HLM Approach.
Is a Federal Mandate the Answer? If So, What Was the Question?
Celebrating Mediocrity? How Schools Shortchange Gifted Students.
Electronic Technology and Its Use With Rural Gifted Students.
Fostering the Social and Emotional Development of Gifted Children Through Guided Viewing of Film.
Muhr and Mawhibah: A Multicultural Perspective on Women's Gifts.
Maximizing Achievement for Potentially Gifted and Talented and Regular Minority Students in a Primary Classroom.
Publishing in Gifted Education: Information for Writers.
Dancing With Monica: Personal Perceptions of a Home-School Mom.
Progressive Digressions: Home Schooling for Self-Actualization.
Illuminating Realities: A Phenomenological View From Two Underachieving Gifted Learners.
State Standardized Testing Programs: Friend or Foe of Gifted Education?
The Structure and Function of Academic Self-Concept in Gifted and General Education Students.
Gifted Adrift? Career Counseling of the Gifted and Talented.
Uncovering Stereotypes and Identifying Characteristics of Gifted Students and Students With Emotional/Behavioral Disabilities.
From Pentagon to Triangle: A Cross-Cultural Investigation of an Implicit Theory of Giftedness.
Thirty Years After: The Lives of Former Winners of Mathematical Olympiads.
Promoting Academic Enablers to Improve Student Achievement: An Introduction to the Mini-Series.
A Model of Academic Enablers and Elementary Reading/Language Arts Achievement.
Motivation as an Enabler for Academic Success.
Academic Engagement: Current Perspectives in Research and Practice.
Getting It Right So They Can Get It Right: An Overview of the Special Series.
Severe Discrepancy Models: Which Best Explains School Identification Practices for Learning Disabilities?
Moving Beyond Total Words Written: The Reliability, Criterion Validity, and Time Cost of Alternative Measures for Curriculum-Based Measurement in Writing.
What is Measured in Mathematics Tests? Construct Validity of Curriculum-Based Mathematics Measures.
The Generalizability of CBM Survey-Level Mathematics Assessments: Just How Many Samples Do We Need?
An Investigation of Situational Bias: Conspicuous and Covert Timing During Curriculum-Based Measurement of Mathematics Across African American and Caucasian Students.
Oral Reading Fluency and Prediction of Reading Comprehension in African American and Caucasian Elementary School Children.
Done in Sixty Second: Further Analysis of the Brief Assessment Model for Academic Problems.
Enhancing First-Grade Children's Mathematical Development with Peer-Assisted Learning Strategies.
Comparison of Retention Rates Using Traditional, Drill Sandwich, and Incremental Rehearsal Flash Card Methods.
CLOSE ONLINE RELATIONSHIPS IN A NATIONAL SAMPLE OF ADOLESCENTS.
FAMILY TRANSITIONS DURING THE ADOLESCENT TRANSITION: IMPLICATIONS FOR PARENTING.
INTRA- AND INTERCULTURAL COMPARISONS OF THE PERSONALITY PROFILES OF MEDICAL STUDENTS IN ARGENTINA AND THE UNITED STATES.
VOCAL BEHAVIOR IN THE DYADIC INTERACTIONS OF PREADOLESCENT AND EARLY ADOLESCENT FRIENDS AND ACQUAINTANCES.
LATINA ADOLESCENTS: PREDICTING INTENTIONS TO HAVE SEX.
YOUNG DADS: THE EFFECTS OF A PARENTING PROGRAM ON URBAN AFRICAN-AMERICAN ADOLESCENT FATHERS.
YOUNG WOMEN DESCRIBE THE IDEAL PHYSICIAN.
PERSONALITY CHARACTERISTICS AS A FUNCTION OF FREQUENCY AND TYPE OF SUBSTANCE USE.
THE EFFECTS OF A MENTORING PROGRAM ON AT-RISK YOUTH.
VIOLENCE AND TOUCH DEPRIVATION IN ADOLESCENTS.
THE ROLE OF ETHNIC IDENTITY AND SELF-CONSTRUAL IN COPING AMONG AFRICAN AMERICAN AND CAUCASIAN AMERICAN SEVENTH GRADERS: AN EXPLORATORY ANALYSIS OF WITHIN-GROUP VARIANCE.
PARENT-CHILD COMMUNICATION, PERCEIVED SANCTIONS AGAINST DRUG USE, AND YOUTH DRUG INVOLVEMENT.
CHINESE ADOLESCENTS' EXPLANATIONS OF POVERTY: THE PERCEIVED CAUSES OF POVERTY SCALE.
UNDERSTANDING ADOLESCENT SUICIDE: A PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION OF DEVELOPMENTAL AND CONTEXTUAL FACTORS.
THE IDENTITY STATUS OF AFRICAN AMERICANS IN MIDDLE ADOLESCENCE: A REPLICATION AND EXTENSION OF FORBES AND ASHTON (1998).
THE ROLE OF PERCEIVED SOCIAL SUPPORT AND DYSFUNCTIONAL ATTITUDES IN PREDICTING TAIWANESE ADOLESCENTS' DEPRESSIVE TENDENCY.
AN ADOLESCENTS VERSION OF THE MICHIGAN ALCOHOLISM SCREENING TEST.
PERSONALITY DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH SUBSTANCE USE AMONG AMERICAN AND GREEK ADOLESCENTS.
AN EXCESS OF TRUTH: Violence, Conspiracy Theorizing and the Algerian Civil War.
MARRIAGE, KIN, AND COMPENSATION: A Socio-Political Ecology of Gender in Ankarana, Madagascar.
'LIVING THE PAST ANOTHER WAY:' Reinstrumentalized Missionary Selves in Aymara Mission Fields.
The Politics of Welfare and of Poverty Research.
U.S. Welfare Reform and Structural Adjustment Policies¹.
Running in Place: Stasis and Change in "Amodernity"
Reflexivity Redux: A Pithy Polemic on 'Positionality'
Desconfianza and Problems of Representation in Urban Ethnography.
The House that Tweed Built.
Jewel of the Indian Ocean.
Sailing into Egypt's Past.
Myths & Monsters.
City of Victory.
Mammoth for Dinner.
Hunting for Treasure.
Plundering Afghanistan.
Anatomy of a Mummy.
Grim Rites of the MOCHE.
Uncommon Light.
Saving Old Havana.
In the Wake of Ancient Mariners.
Enigma in Stone.
The Race to Save Afghan Culture.
Caligula's Floating Palaces.
Scythian Steeds.
Emerald City.
Doyenne of Mayanists.
Case of the Colorado Cannibal.
Reliving the Nightmare.
Legacies of a Slavic Pompeii.
TALES FROM STORYVILLE.
Chronicler of Ice Age Life.
A Long Road Home.
Saga of Cleopatra's Needles.
Andean Odyssey.
Legacy of the Crusades.
Mexico's Wonder Plant.
A Painted Land.
Digging Napoleon's Dead.
To the Shores of Tripoli.
WOMAN THE TOOLMAKER.
The Other Pyramids.
Cherokee Holy of Holies.
COMMUNITY, SOCIETY, AND THE INDIVIDUAL.
HAZARDS IN THE BOG--REAL AND IMAGINED.
RUNOFF PRODUCTION AND EROSION PROCESSES ON A DEHESA IN WESTERN SPAIN.
MUEBLES RÚSTICOS IN MEXICO AND THE UNITED STATES.
UPLAND AGRICULTURE IN THE MAYA LOWLANDS: ANCIENT MAYA SOIL CONSERVATION IN NORTHWESTERN BELIZE.
SEASONAL FLOODPLAIN-UPLAND MIGRATION ALONG THE LOWER AMAZON RIVER.
RURAL PLACE ATTACHMENT IN HISPANO URBAN CENTERS.
MARCEL DUCHAMP'S ART AND THE GEOGRAPHY OF MODERN PARIS.
AGRICULTURAL EXPANSION IN NORTHERN ALBERTA.
'THE FARTHER REACHES OF HUMAN TIME': RETROSPECT ON CARL SAUER AS PREHISTORIAN.
REVISITING THE TOPIA ROAD: WALKING IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF WEST AND PARSONS.
CORMORANT FISHING IN SOUTHWESTERN CHINA: A TRADITIONAL FISHERY UNDER SIEGE.
One Last Pleasure? Alcohol Use among Elderly People in Nursing Homes.
Families Helping Families: Implementing a Multifamily Therapy Group with Substance-Abusing Adolescents.
Brief Motivational Intervention for Substance-Abusing Delinquent Adolescents: Guided Self-Change as a social Work Practice Innovation.
Structured Stories: Reinforcing Social Skills in Rural Substance Abuse Treatment.
Treatment with Lesbian Alcoholics: Healing Shame and Internalized Homophobia for Ongoing Sobriety.
Harm Reduction and Injection Drug Use: Pragmatic Lessons from a Public Health Model.
The Xchange Point: A Drop-In Center for African American Active Injection Drug Users.
A Comparison of Drug Use between Welfare-Receiving Arrestees and Non-Welfare-Receiving Arrestees.
Defining Substance Abusers Using a Prism: What You See Is What You Get.
Promoting Community Awareness to Enhance Mental Health.
MENTAL HEALTH RECOVERY PARADIGM: Implications for Social Work.
DIMENSIONS AND PREDICTIONS OF PROFESSIONAL INVOLVEMENT IN SELF-HELP GROUPS: A View from Within.
CONSUMER DROP-IN CENTERS: Operations, Services, and Customer Involvement.
TRACKING CHANGE IN PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTRESS AMONG HOMELESS ADULTS: An Examination of the Effect of Housing Status.
SOCIAL WORK IN RESTRUCTURING HOSPITALS: Program Management Five Years Later.
PARENTING ADOLESCENTS WITH ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER: Analysis of the Literature for Social Work Practice.
PREDICTORS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING AMONG ASSISTED-LIVING RESIDENTS.
Medication Assistance Program: University of Missouri Health Care Department of Social Services.
Crisis in Caregiving: A Call to Action.
The Physical Education and Sport Curriculum in the 21st Century: Proposed Common Denominators.
The Relationship Between Attitude Toward Physical Education and Leisure-Time Exercise in High School Students.
An Assessment of the Factors that Influence the Promotion and Delivery of Sport, Fitness, and Health Courses: Contributions of Marketing to Physical Education.
Multimedia Software's Effects on High School Physical Education Students' Fitness Patterns.
The USPE-L Listserv: A Forum for Reflective Discourse?
Practice and Motor Learning.
'I Hate Phys. Ed.': Adolescent Girls Talk About Physical Education.
Assessing Physical Activity & Physical Characteristics of Prepubescent Children in Greece.
Middle School Students' Perceptions of Coed versus Non-Coed Physical Education.
What Professional Educators Can Learn from Practicing Physical Education Teachers?
Perceptions of Challenging Behavior by Pre-service Physical Educators: A Preliminary Study.
Frequency and Nature of Physical Education Preparation of Elementary Education Majors.
Creativity Interacts with Fitness and Exercise.
Would You Hire Plato To Teach Physical Education at Your School?
A Short Instrument for Assessing Intrinsic Motivation for Physical Activity.
Students Designing and Applying Evaluation Rubrics in an Aerobics Unit.
Perceptions of Occupational Stress and Strategies for Avoiding Burnout: Case Studies of Two Female Teacher-Coaches.
Implementation of Olympic Culture in the School Curriculum in Greece.
Keeping the Culture with Food Guide Pyramids.
Perceptions of High, Average and Low Performance Second Graders About Physical Education and Physical Education Teachers.
Our secularist Democratic party.
Do we need the census race question?
The lost sense of honor.
The three faith factors.
How the terrorists get in.
Politics after the Internet.
Slavery and the black family.
The truth about globalization.
Can liberal education survive liberal democracy?
Our tottering confirmation process.
The death and life of America's cities.
Where have all the nurses gone?
The problem with polling.
The forgotten T.R.
Mr. Jefferson's university breaks up.
Making school reform work.
The survival of moral federalism.
Childhood Sexual Experiences and the Perception of Abuse Among Latino Men Who Have Sex With Men.
How Common is Intersex? A Response to Anne Fausto-Sterling.
The Influence of Dual-Identity Development on the Psychosocial Functioning of African-American Gay and Bisexual Men.
Sexual Diversity in Urban Norwegians.
Reports of Childhood Sexual Abuse by Adolescents and Young Adults: Stability Over Time.
Heterosexuals' Attitudes Toward Bisexual Men and Women in the United States.
Predicting Responses to Sexually Aggressive Stories: The Role of Consent, Interest in Sexual Aggression, and Overall Sexual Interest.
Relationship Power, Decision Making, and Sexual Relations: An Exploratory Study with Couples of Mexican Origin.
The Economy of Risk and Respect: Accounts by Puerto Rican Sex Workers of HIV Risk Taking.
Relationship Functioning and Sexuality Among People With Multiple Sclerosis.
Understanding Human Ambivalence about Sex: The Effects of Stripping Sex of Meaning.
Sexual Functioning and Self-Reported Depressive Symptoms Among College Women.
Peer Modeling and College Men's Sexually Impositional Behavior in the Laboratory.
Self and Other Obedience Estimates: Biases and Moderators.
Judging Gender From Samples of Adult Handwriting: Accuracy and Use of Cues.
Political Rhetoric, Immigration Attitudes, and Contemporary Prejudice: A Mexican American Dilemma.
Dogmatic Behavior Among Students: Testing a New Measure of Dogmatism.
Determinants of Employee Punctuality.
Classroom Behavior and the Ability to Decode Nonverbal Cues in Boys With Severe Emotional Disturbance.
Perception of the Minority's Collective Identity and Voting Behavior: The Case of the Palestinians in Israel.
Behavioral Consequences of Fluctuating Group Success: An Internet Study of Soccer-Team Fans.
U.S. Patriotism and Ideologies of Group Dominance: A Tale of Asymmetry.
Religious Affiliation of Russian-Speaking Heroin Addicts in Israel.
Jewish-Arab Violence: Perspectives of a Dominant Majority and a Subordinate Minority.
To Work or Not to Work: Nonfinancial Employment Commitment and the Social Desirability Bias.
Work-Family Conflict, Locus of Control, and Women's Well-Being: Tests of Alternative Pathways.
Race and Sport Consumption Motivations: A Preliminary Investigation of a Black Consumers' Sport Motivation Scale.
Coping with Failure: The Effects of Self-Esteem and Coping on Changes in Self-Efficacy.
The Athletic, Academic and Social Experiences of Intercollegiate Student-Athletes.
Perceptions of Success and Failure Among University Athletes in Canada.
Effects of Exercise and Outcome Feedback on Mood: Evidence for Misattribution.
Idiosyncratic Performance Affect in Volleyball Referees: An Extension of the IZOF-emotion Model Profiling.
World Cup Soccer Home Advantage.
Withdrawal from Competitive Youth Sport: A Retrospective Ten-year Study.
College Coaches' Views About the Development of Successful Athletes: A Descriptive Exploratory Investigation.
Testing the Sport Commitment Model in the Context of Exercise and Fitness Participation.
The Influence of Competition Location on Athletes' Psychological States.
Psychological Response to Athletic Injury: Gender Differences.
Sources of Expectancy Information Among Assistant Coaches: The Influence of Performance and Psychological Cues.
Simultaneous Study of Individual and Group Correlations: An Application Example.
'A Long and Broad Education': Jewish Girls and the Problem of Education in America, 1860-1920.
Race-neutral Individualism and Resurgence of the Color Line: Massachusetts Civil Rights Legislation, 1855-1895.
Contested Citizenship: National Identity and the Mexican Immigration Debates of the 1920s.
The Chinese Exclusion Example: Race, Immigration, and American Gatekeeping, 1882-1924.
The Diversity Visa Lottery - A Cycle of Unintended Consequences in United States Immigration Policy.
Teaching Irish-American History.
Comment: Teaching Irish-American History.
Comment: Irish-American Studies and Undergraduate Pedagogy.
Comment: Teaching Irish-American History.
From Ellis Island to JFK - An Economist's Perspective.
From Ellis Island to JFK: Comparison in Anthropology and History.
Race, the Children of Immigrants, and Social Science Theory.
Old and New Migrants in the Twentieth Century: A European Perspective.
Response.
The Comic Vision of Anishinaabe Culture and Religion.
From Bohemianism to Radicalism: The Art of the Liberator.
Against All Odds: Vira B. Whitehouse and Rosika Schwimmer in Switzerland, 1918.
Gender, Race and Civilization: The Competition between American Power Laundries and Chinese Steam Laundries, 1870s - 1920s.
Politics, Performance and Indian Identity.
Culture Change in the Making: Some Examples of How a Catholic Missionary Changed Micmac Religion.
The Heritage of Stories: A Tradition of Wisdom.
As Long as the Waters Shall Run: The 'Obstructed Water' Metaphor in American Indian Fiction.
'Use the Club of White Man's Wisdom in Defence of Our Customs': White Schools and Native Agendas.
Depictions of White Children in Captivity Narratives.
Construction of the Mythic Indian in Mainstream Media and the Demystification of the Stereotype by American Indian Artists.
Conference Notes German Association for American Studies May 21-24, 2002.
PALESTINIAN ATTITUDES TOWARD DEMOCRACY AND ITS COMPATIBILITY WITH ISLAM: EVIDENCE FROM PUBLIC OPINION RESEARCH IN THE WEST BANK AND GAZA.
THE 'AL-AQSA INTIFADA' AS A RESULT OF POLITICS OF A TRANSITION.
TURKISH-SYRIAN RELATIONS REVISITED.
THE LIMITATIONS OF INTER-GROUP LEARNING IN CONFESSIONAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS: THE CASE OF LEBANON.
INTRODUCTION.
TERRORISM, COUNTERTERRORISM AND INTERNATIONAL LAW.
UNERSTANDING, RESPONDING TO, AND PREVENTING TERRORISM.
THE AFTERMATH OF SEPTEMBER 11, 2001: THE TARGETING OF ARABS AND MUSLIMS IN AMERICA.
WHOLESALE TERRORISM ESCALATES.
DISCURSIVE PLURALISM AND ISLAMIC MODERNISM IN EGYPT.
The Taiwan Factor in U.S.-China Relations: An Interpretation.
Are Japanese Attitudes Toward Whaling America-Bashing? A Response to Tanno and Hamazaki.
Tiananmen Square Thirteen Years After: The Prospects for Civil Unrest in China.
Handling the Taiwan Issue: Bush Administration Policy toward Beijing and Taipei.
Implications of the Asian Flu for Developmental State Theory: The Cases of South Korea and Taiwan.
Political Cynicism in South Korea: Economics or Values?
Structural Reforms in Japan: Promises and Perils.
Explaining Change in the Carter Administration's China Policy: Foreign Policy Adviser Manipulation of the Policy Agenda.
Pacific Asia in the Twenty-First Century World Order.
Emerging Stability in Cambodia.
Cross-Strait Relations in the Aftermath of the Election of Chen Shui-bian.
Fishy Business: A Political-Economic Analysis of the Southern Bluefin Tuna Dispute.
NATO's Price.
Toughest on the Poor.
Governing the Internet.
The Future of AIDS.
From Prague to Baghdad: NATO at Risk.
Russia Renewed?
The Real Roots of Arab Anti-Americanism.
A Renaissance for U.S. Trade Policy?
The Responsibility to Protect.
Humanitarianism in Crisis.
When Soldiers Become Cops.
Can Burma Reform?
Does Saudi Arabia Still Matter?
Letters to the Editor.
Can the EU Hack the Balkans? A Proving Ground for Brussels.
From North-South to South-South . The True Face of Global Competition.
Advancing Peace in the Middle East. The Economic Path Out of Conflict.
Bush and the World. THE NEED FOR A NEW WILSONIANISM.
America s Imperial Ambition-THE LURES OF PREEMPTION.
The Inadequacy of American Power. ALONE AT THE TOP.
Public Diplomacy and the War on Terrorism. A STRATEGY FOR REFORM.
EDITOR'S FORWARD.
STATE POLICIES AND THE PRESERVATION OF FOREST COVER.
PESTICIDES, PARAKEETS, AND UNIONS IN THE COSTA RICAN BANANA INDUSTRY, 1938-1962.
DRY LAW, WET POLITICS: Drinking and Prohibition in Post-Revolutionary Yucatán, 1915-1935.
RURAL PUERTO RICO IN THE EARLY TWENTIETH CENTURY RECONSIDERED: Land and Society, 1899-1915.
EDITOR'S FOREWORD.
CENTRAL AMERICAN UNIONS IN THE ERA OF GLOBALIZATION.
THE MEXICAN STATE AND TRANSMIGRANT ORGANIZATIONS.
African American History as Depicted in Recently Published Children's Books.
A Multipurpose Guide to Teaching the Ten Thematic Strands of Social Studies through Life Span Education.
Creative Problem Solving: A Means to Authentic and Purposeful Social Studies.
Is It Time for Social Studies to Be Financially Fit?
The Why, What, and How of Teaching Children Social Skills.
Use Primary Sources to Develop a Soap Opera: As the Civil War Turns.
Finding the Expanding Environments Curriculum in America's First Primary Schools.
How Will the U.S. Supreme Court Decide?
Public Opinion, Constitutional Democracy, and the New Technology.
Debating the Curriculum: Social Studies or History, 1892--1937.
The Homeless Social Studies Teacher: How Muzak Progressivism Has Harmed Social Studies Education.
Challenging Students with the Tools of Critical Thinking.
Creating a 'World of Discovery' by Thinking and Acting Globally in Social Studies: Ideas from New Zealand.
After the Reading Assignment: Strategies for Leading Student-Centered Classroom Conversations.
Integrated Biographical Inquiry: A Student-Centered Approach to Learning.
Accuracy and Bias in Children's Environmental Literature: A Look at Lynne Cherry's Books.
U.S. Kids Don't Know U.S. History: The NAEP Study, Perspectives, and Presuppositions.
What Can Happen to Auspicious Beginnings: Historical Barriers to Ideal Citizenship.
Understanding Social Security: A Civic Obligation.
Social Studies Standards, Benchmarks, and Assessments: An Analysis of an Eighth-Grade Exam.
American Indian Treaties and the Presidents: A Guide to the Treaties Proclaimed by Each Administration.
What Is the Job of the President of the United States?
Essential Web Sites to Research the Globalization Process.
NINE CONTRADICTIONS IN THE NEW GOLDEN AGE OF AFRICAN ART.
The Ecole de Dakar.
Dealing with the Devil.
SITES OF IDENTITY AND RESISTANCE.
GENESIS: Ideas of Origin in African Sculpture.
THE SHORT CENTURY Independence and Liberation Movements in Africa, 1945-1994.
LEGENDS, SORCERERS AND ENCHANTED LIZARDS Door Locks of the Bamana of Mali.
The Poet of Négritude.
Ethnographic Notes on Kongo Musical Instruments.
THE CULTURED BODY.
MUSEUMS AND CONTEMPORARY AFRICAN ART.
Carved Ogboni Figures from Abeokuta, Nigeria.
Fante Asafo Flags of Abandze and Kormantse.
ROBERT VISSER AND HIS PHOTOGRAPHS FROM THE LOANGO COAST.
A Saint in the City.
Katarikawe Dreaming.
The Water Mill and Northern Song Imperial Patronage of Art, Commerce, and Science.
'Fare una Cosa Morta Parer Viva': Michelangelo, Rosso, and the (Un)Divinity of Art.
The Demonic Arts and the Origin of the Medium.
Between Cult and Culture: Bamiyan, Islamic Iconoclasm, and the Museum. (cover story)
Mourning and Method.
EXILE AND EMPIRE: THE SPACES OF THE SUBJECT IN FERNANDO DE HERRERA.
HOMOSOCIALITY AND DRAMATIC CONFLICT: A RECONSIDERATION OF EARLY MODERN SPANISH COMEDY.
DOGMA AND DISBELIEF IN QUEVEDO'S POETRY.
SOCIAL CRISIS AND CONVERSION: APOSTASY AND INQUISITION IN THE CHRONICLES OF FERNANDO DEL PULGAR AND ANDRÉS BERNÁLDEZ.
DON QUIJOTE WINS BY A NOSE.
DEATH AND THE CHILD IN SU ÚNICO HIJO.
On the Metathesis of Labials + /j/ in Hispano-Romance.
Erotic Paranoia and Wife Murder in Calderonian Dramaa.
Pereda and the Closure of the Roman à Thèse: From Don Gonzalo Gonzáles de la Gonzalera to Peñas arriba.
BEYOND THE CANON: NEW DOCUMENTS ON THE FEMINIST DEBATE IN EARLY MODERN SPAIN.
ON THE PLACE OF MADNESS, DEVIANCE, AND ECCENTRICITY IN DON QUIJOTE.
LA FUERZA DEL AMOR OR THE POWER OF SELF-LOVE: ZAYAS' RESPONSE TO CERVANTES' LE FUERZA DE LA SANGRE.
FRAY LUIS DE LEÓN AS TRANSLATOR OF THE PSALMS: A READING OF PSALMS 103, 44, AND 102 IN DE LOS NOMBRES DE CRISTO.
PRISMA I AND II.
Linking Music Learning To Reading Instruction. (cover story)
INTEGRATING MUSIC AND CHILDREN'S LITERATURE.
STRINGS ATTACHED: A MUSICAL LISTENING UNIT.
RICHARD RODGERS: THE MAN AND HIS MUSIC.
ENHANCED ASSESSMENT IN INSTRUMENTAL PROGRAMS.
A TREASURY OF AMERICAN SONG.
FIT TO PLAY: MUSICIANS' HEALTH TIPS.
CHORAL ENSEMBLES FOR INDEPENDENT MUSICIANSHIP.
CURRICULUM WRITING IN MUSIC.
MENC TODAY.
The Conductor as Servant-Leader.
Professional Teaching Portfolios: For Pros and Preservice Teachers Alike.
Recruiting for the Choral Ensemble by Emphasizing Skill and Effort.
Singing in the Band Rehearsal.
Jazz Listening Activities: Children's Literature and Authentic Music Samples.
Successful Singing for All in the Elementary Grades.
Connections.
MENC TODAY.
Music Education Philosophy: Changing Times.
Music Education in a Time of Cultural Transformation.
Psychology and Music Education since 1950.
Historical Perspectives on Technology and Music.
A History of Music Education Advocacy.
Doing It All: Linking the Elements of Music and the Standards.
For your library.
Idea bank.
Between the Net and the Deep Blue Sea (Rethinking the Traffic in Photographs).
The Avant-Garde and the 'New Spirit': The Case of Ballet mécanique.
The Flattening of 'College'
Coming into Sight: Seeing Robert Delaunay's Structure of Vision.
The Crimes of the Flaneur.
On Pierre Bourdieu: Three Responses.
This Photography Which Is Not One: In the Gray Zone with Tina Modotti.
Paris, Capital of the Soviet Avant-Garde.
pathos: Trois Contes.
Sherrie Levine's Art History.
Apostrophe in Life and in Romantic Art: Everyday Discourse, Overhearing, and Poetic Address.
Identifying Metaphor in Language: A Cognitive Approach.
Mapping the Mind and the Body: On W.H. Auden's Personifications.
Resources for Discourse Analysis in Composition Studies.
Adaptationist Literary Study: An Emerging Research Program.
Prose Styles, Genres, and Levels of Analysis.
From Iser to Turner and Beyond: Reception Theory Meets Cognitive Criticism.
Reading Literature/Culture: A Translation of 'Reading as a Cultural Practice'
The Englishing of Juvenal: Computational Stylistics and Translated Texts.
A Short Guide to the Theory of the Sublime.
Corpus-Based Text Analysis from a Qualitative Perspective: A Closer Look at NVivo.
THE LEGEND OF FRA VICENTS IN EUROPEAN AND CATALAN CULTURE.
BETWEEN SOUND AND FURY: ASSIA DJEBAR'S POETICS OF 'L'ENTRE-DEUX-LANGUES'
THE FIGURE OF THE "SPECTATOR" IN THE THEORETICAL WRITINGS OF BRECHT, DIDEROT, AND ROUSSEAU.
HOCQUARD'S CARTOGRAPHIES.
Self-serve LEGAL AID.
Partners at RISK.
Drawing Boundaries.
GRANDE OPPORTUNITY.
Drug Wars. (cover story)
REVISIONS, NOT REVOLUTION.
Civil Cities.
PROSECUTING MOUSSAOUI.
POISONED BY PAINT.
Discovery Channels.
HOT Off the PRESS. (cover story)
The Prosecution Never Rests.
Winning Ways WITH JUDGES.
DR. COP ON THE STAND.
Drawing THE LINE.
WORLD OF Change.
Hack Attack.
60 Years of Good Works.
Motion Warriors. (cover story)
Death Delayed.
Tax Issues From A TOUGH YEAR.
THE VANISHING TRIAL. (cover story)
BOOSTING THE Bench.
COSTLY Speech.
RESPECTING THE Elders.
The Aftermath: How 9-11 Changed Us. (cover story)
THE CLOSING DOOR.
SEEKING THE RIGHT EQUATION.
CAN ANYONE STOP INTERNET PORN?
Population and Security: How Demographic Change Can Lead to Violent Conflict.
Demographic Engineering and The Struggle for Power.
Demography and Communalism In India.
Differential Demographic Growth in Multinational States: Israel's Two-Front War.
Migration and Security: Some Key Linkages.
Crime and Violence in an Urbanizing World.
The Global Raiders: Nationalism, Globalization and the South African Brain Drain.
The Middle East's Demographic Transition: What Does It Mean?
The Shape of Things to Come: Global Aging in the Twenty-first Century.
Climate Fluctuations, Demography and Development: Insights and Opportunities for Northeast Brazil.
Environment, Population and Conflict: New Modalities of Threat and Vulnerability in South Asia¹.
Demographic Change, Natural Resources and Violence: The Current Debate.
Ecoviolence? Links Between Population Growth, Environmental Scarcity and Violent Conflict in Thomas Homer-Dixon's Work¹.
REFLECTIONS ON THE TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC POLICY.
LOCATING THE BOUNDARIES: THE SCOPE OF CONGRESS'S POWER TO REGULATE COMMERCE.
BUSINESS, THE STATES, AND FEDERALISM'S POLITICAL ECONOMY.
RE-ENTERING THE ARENA: RESTORING A JUDICIAL ROLE FOR ENFORCING LIMITS ON FEDERAL MANDATES.
BEWARE THE TRUMPETS OF WAR: A RESPONSE TO KENNETH ANDERSON.
THE FIRST AMENDMENT AND PROBLEMS OF POLITICAL VIABILITY: THE CASE OF INTERNET PORNOGRAPHY.
TOWARD A NATIONAL PUTATIVE FATHER REGISTRY DATABASE.
A LOCKEAN ANALYSIS OF SECTION ONE OF THE FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT.
The Silent Revolution: Political, Ideological, and Group Dimensions of the Immigration Crisis.
A Literary Exercise in Self-Knowledge: Strauss's Twofold Interpretation of Maimonides.
Jaffa versus Mansfield: Does America Have a Constitutional or a 'Declaration of Independence' Soul?
Being Claude Dukenfield: W. C. Fields and the American Dream.
Heroes and Political Communities in John Ford's Westerns: The Role of Wyatt Earp in My Darling Clementine.
Disco and Democracy: Thoughts on Stillman's Film and Book.
Awakening from the American Dream: The End of Escape in American Cinema?
In the Truth of Our Political Nature: Pierre Manent's Defense of Political Reason in Cours familier de philosophie politique.
Pierre Manent and the New First Philosophy of Politics.
Liberation from the Weberian Iron Cage: Pierre Manent on Max Weber.
The Fragility of Existence: Reflections on September 11.
The Political Economy of Regime Transformation: Taiwan and Southeast Asia.
The Korean Peace Process: Problems and Prospects after the Summit.
The Great Exception: Russian Civil--Military Relations.
The Decline of Ideology and the Rise of 'Quality of Politics' Parties in Latin America.
Southern Europe, Eastern Europe, and Comparative Politics.
Defining the Borders of the New Europe.
India and the Clinton-Bush Administrations.
Crisis of Government, Ethnic Schisms, Civil War, and Regional Destabilization of the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Interventions and Civil Conflicts.
Post-tympanostomy tube otorrhea in children: A clinical overview.
Chronic suppurative otitis media: A clinical overview.
Perioperative antibiotics in chronic suppurative otitis media.
Adenoid cystic carcinoma of the paranasal sinuses or nasal cavity: a 40--year review of 35 cases.
A rare case of mucoepidermoid carcinoma of the nasal cavity.
Rapid growth of acoustic neuromas after stereotactic radiotherapy in type 2 neurofibromatosis.
Study of surgeons' agreement on the presence of bony anomalies on coronal CT of paranasal sinuses.
Synchronous parotid and nasopharyngeal Warthin's tumors: First report of a case.
An unusual case of primary nasal tuberculosis with epistaxis and epilepsy.
Facial paralysis caused by malignant skull base neoplasms.
Blastomycosis of the vocal folds with life-threatening upper airway obstruction: A case report.
Prognostic factors in mortality and morbidity in patients with differentiated thyroid cancer.
PRODUCT MARKETPLACE.
Orbital infection as a complication of sinusitis: Are diagnostic and treatment trends changing?
Penetrating trauma to the head and neck from a nail gun: A unique mechanism of injury.
Demyelination of vestibular nerve axons in unilateral Ménière's disease.
Tuberculous otitis media: Two case reports and literature review.
Unifocal Langerhans' cell histiocytosis and frontal sinus agenesis: Report of a rare case.
Delay in maturation of the auditory pathway and its relationship to language acquisition disorders.
Comparison of bipolar scissors and bipolar forceps in tonsillectomy.
Revision tympanomastoid surgery.
A simple and reliable method of patient evaluation in the surgical treatment of nasal obstruction.
Tracheal necrosis and surgical emphysema: A rare complication of thyroidectomy.
Laryngopharyngeal reflux 2002: A new paradigm of airway disease. (cover story)
Laryngopharyngeal reflux is different from classic gastroesophageal reflux disease. (cover story)
Symptoms and findings of laryngopharyngeal reflux. (cover story)
Laryngopharyngeal reflux testing. (cover story)
Attitudes About Electric and Magnetic Fields: Do Scientists and Other Risk Experts Perceive Risk Similarly?
Reflections on a Career in Public Health: Evolving Foodborne Pathogens, Environmental Health, and Food Safety Programs.
Risk Communication and Public Response to Industrial Chemical Contamination in Sydney, Nova Scotia: A Case Study.
Bioterrorism Response, Unintended Consequences, and the Role of Environmental Health.
An Assessment of Lead Exposure Potential from Residential Cutoff Valves.
Outbreaks in Drinking-Water Systems, 1991-1998.
Setting the Context: Environmental Health Practitioner Competencies.
Grading Systems for Retail Food Facilities: Preference Reversals of Environmental Health Professionals.
Laboratory Investigation of an E. coli 0157:H7 Outbreak Associated with Swimming in Battle Ground Lake, Vancouver, Washington.
Graywater Use Still a Gray Area.
Salmonella and Other Enterobacteriaceae in Dairy-Cow Feed Ingredients: Antimicrobial Resistance in Western Oregon.
Potential Salmonella Transmission from Ornamental Fountains.
Indoor Air Quality Assessment of Daycare Facilities with Carbon Dioxide, Temperature, and Humidity as Indicators.
Is Contaminated Ground Water an Important Cause of Viral Gastroenteritis in the United States?
Fluoride Overfeed at a Well Site Near an Elementary School in Michigan.
NEHA's 2002 Annual Educational Conference and Exhibition Minneapolis, Minnesota.
An Exposure Assessment of PM[sub10] from a Major Highway Interchange: Are Children in Nearby Schools at Risk? (cover story)
Releases of Hazardous Substances in Schools: Data from the Hazardous Substances Emergency Events Surveillance System, 1993-1998.
Where We Are in Retail Food Safety, How We Got to Where We Are, and How Do We Get There?
More Liability Cases.
Healthcare Information Systems: Analysis of Healthcare Software.
Goldratt's Thinking Process Applied to Medical Claims Processing.
The Impact of the Balanced Budget Act on the Utilization and Financial Condition of Children's Services in California Hospitals.
The Uninsured: A Reality Check.
Development of a Healthcare Quality Improvement Measurement Tool: Results of a Content Validity Study.
Who Shall Care for the Children of the Poor and Uninsured? Pediatric Dentistry in the United States.
Turnover of Certified Nursing Assistants: A Major Problem for Long-term Care Facilities.
Wellness Programs: A Remedy for Reducing Healthcare Costs.
Fifteen Years of Nexus- A 21st Century Retrospective.
Hubris and the Undoing of American Medicine.
Assessing Patient Satisfaction and Quality of Care through Observation and Interview.
Supervisory Power and Its Influence on Staff Members and Their Customers.
The Educational Needs of Healthcare Managers and Executives in the Key Strategic Areas of Healthcare.
Collective Bargaining in the Nursing Profession: Salient Issues and Recent Developments in Healthcare Reform.
Hospital Executive Leadership: A Critical Component for Improving Care at the End of Life.
Health Services Management Ethics: A Primer.
Organ Donation among African Americans: Opportunities for Increasing Donor Rates.
Overcrowding and Fiscal Pressures in Emergency Medicine.
Reducing the Hospital Workforce: What Is The Role of Human Resource Management Practices?
A Struggle with Obligation: Ethical Reflections on a Transplantation Program.
Strengthening the System: Joint Commission Standards and Building on What We Know.
Cultural, Ethnic, and Religious Diversity in Service Delivery.
Patterns of Health and Illness: The Effects of Poverty on Health.
Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies.
Diagnostic strategy for patients with suspected pulmonary embolism: a prospective multicentre outcome study.
HIV-1, hepatitis B virus, and risk of liver-related mortality in the Multicenter Cohort Study (MACS).
Health programmes and policies associated with decreased mortality in displaced people in postemergency phase camps: a retrospective study.
Building a global culture of science.
Oestrogen therapy for prevention of reinfarction in postmenopausal women: a randomised placebo controlled trial.
Ultrasonography in the diagnosis and management of developmental hip dysplasia (UK Hip Trial): clinical and economic results of a multicentre randomised controlled trial.
Mitoxantrone in progressive multiple sclerosis: a placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomised, multicentre trial.
Dignity in the terminally ill: a cross-sectional, cohort study.
Sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine alone or with amodiaquine or artesunate for treatment of uncomplicated malaria: a longitudinal randomised trial.
Production of tissue factor by pancreatic islet cells as a trigger of detrimental thrombotic reactions in clinical islet transplantation.
The portrait of breast cancer and Raphael's La Fornarina.
'--but who is that on the other side of you?' Extracampine hallucinations revisited.
Street children and child labour around the world.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The Management and Prevention of Rigid Cervical Collar Complications.
Health Concerns of Men with Osteoarthritis of the Knee.
Pathogenesis of Anterior Cruciate Ligament Injury.
Returning to School: An Alternative to 'Traditional' Education.
Current Trends in Wound Care Management.
Psychological Aspects of Caring for the Adolescent Undergoing Spinal Fusion for Scoliosis.
Interdigital Perineural Fibroma (a.k.a. Morton's Neuroma).
Diagnosis and treatment of interdigital Perineural Fibroma (a.k.a. Morton's Neuroma).
Patient Knowledge, Behavior, and Satisfaction With the Use of a Preoperative DVD.
Fractures.
Codependency, Boundaries, and Professional; Nurse Caring.
Writing for publication: Ethical Considerations.
'Linking the Orthopaedic Patient with Community Family Violence Resources'
Viscosupplementation: A New Treatment Option for Osteoarthritis.
Demystifying APA Style.
Prehabilitation in Preparation for Orthopaedic Surgery.
Tourniquet Safety in Lower Leg Applications.
Treatment of Pain for Older Hip Fracture Patients Across Settings.
Implementing Clinical Research: Perils, Pitfalls, and Planning.
Treating Osteoporosis without Hormones.
SYMPOSIUM: IS HIGHER EDUCATION COMPATIBLE WITH PATRIOTISM?
Whither the Great Books?
DIVERSITY AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION: THE STATE OF CAMPUS OPINION.
Social Sciences and the Unity of Truth.
Academic Questions / Summer 2002 SYMPOSIUM: ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND POLITICAL CORRECTNESS IN WARTIME.
On Self-Evident Truths.
The Measure of Civilizations.
Abraham Lincoln and the Pillars of Liberty.
A Reckoning.
Diversity and the Abolition of Learning.
Critical Thinking in the Tower Ivory.
Honoris Causa.
The Program Is Aristotelian.
Platonizing the Core Curriculum.
A Spinozist Synthesis of the Liberal Arts.
A Distinctly Bluesy Condition.
Sensitive.
In Search of The Treasure of the Sierra Madre.
Polonius, Our Pundit.
The Years with Kolatch.
John Reed's Unblinking Stare.
The Road from Abalak.
The Harpsichord on the Mountain.
Marooned.
The Peculiarities of German Travel.
In Iran.
The Blood of Christ in the Later Middle Ages.
'The same cause and like quarell': Eusebius, John Foxe, and the Evolution of Ecclesiastical History.
Historical and Systematic Theology in the Mirror of Church History: The Lessons of 'Ordination' in Sixteenth-Century Saxony.
The Imagined Crusade: The Church of England and the Mythology of Nationalism and Christianity during the Great War.
Conservative Social Christianity, the Law, and Personal Morality: Wilbur F. Crafts in Washington.
Without Comment or Controversy: The G.I. Bill and Catholic Colleges.
Post-secularism Marginalizes the University: A Rejoinder to Hollinger.
Why Is There So Much Christianity in the United States? A Reply to Sommerville.
The Early Church in North America: Late Antiquity, Theory, and the History of Christianity.
The Future of Medieval Church History.
Age and Occupational Status of Defendant in Relation to Mock Juror Sentencing Recommendations.
Evidence for the 'Guilt by Familial Association' Effect: Evil Twins Excepted.
Factors Influencing Juror Verdict in a Case Involving Repressed Memories of Abuse.
Vulnerability to False Memory: The Effects of Stress, Imagery, Trait Anxiety, and Depression.
Accuracy of Recall among 'Eyewitnesses' to a Simulated Robbery: Intrapersonal and Stimulus Determinants.
Further Evidence of a Robust Point-of-View Bias in Videotaped Confessions.
Syllogistic Reasoning Tasks and Working Memory: Evidence from Sequential Presentation of Premises.
Individual Differences in Mature Readers in Reading, Spelling, and Grapheme-phoneme Conversion.
Charged Experiences of Natural Environments.
Homotopic Callosal Inhibition in Hemispheric Priming: A Test of Cook's Topographical Inhibitory Model.
We Think You Agree: The Detrimental Impact of the False Consensus Effect on Behavior.
Reactions of Third-Graders to Recognition Allocation After Being Peer-Imitated.
Differential Incidence of Procrastination Between Blue-and White-Collar Workers.
The Values of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapists at Two Points in Time (1979 vs. 1993): A Cross-Over Comparative Study.
Dimensions of Loneliness Among Canadian and Czech Youth: A Cross-National Study.
Whence Comes Death?
Spirituality without Faith.
Finding Freedom.
W...men under the Taliban.
ISLAM AND TERRORISM.
How Politics Impact Your Personal Life.
Origins of the Iraeli/Palestinian Conflict: Triumph and Catastrophe.
Instead of Cursing the Darkness, Light One Small Blowtorch.
the global reach of privacy invasion.
PRACTICAL PACIFISM AND THE WAR ON TERROR.
new MILLENNIUM: status and vision.
the demystification of islam.
Under God divides the Indivisible.
Origins of the Israeli/Palestinian Conflict The Seeds of Emnity.
Arabs and Jews.
What's Literacy Got to Do with It?
Are we becoming a nation of depressives?
Body Image Dissatisfaction: Gender Differences in Eating Attitudes, Self-Esteem, and Reasons for Exercise.
The Influence of Belief That a Car Crashed on Witnesses' Estimates of Civilian and Police Car Speed.
Experiences of Longing in Norwegian and Swedish 4- and 5-Year-Old Children.
Determinants of Loneliness of Young Adult Drug Users.
Dimensions of Depression and Perfectionism in Pregnant and Nonpregnant Women: Their Levels and Interrelationships and Their Relationship to Marital Satisfaction.
Turkish College Students' Attitudes Toward Women Managers: The Effects of Patriarchy, Sexism, and Gender Differences.
An Investigation of Worry and Sense of Humor.
Examining Contrast Effects in Performance Appraisals: Using Appropriate Controls and Assessing Accuracy.
Memory for Animal Tracks: A Possible Cognitive Artifact of Human Evolution.
Exploring the Mental Health of Mexican Migrant Farm Workers in the Midwest: Psychosocial Predictors of Psychological Distress and Suggestions for Prevention and Treatment.
Test-Retest Reliability of the Emotional Stroop Task: Examining the Paradox of Measurement Change.
Perceptions of Goal-Directed Activities of Optimists and Pessimists: A Personal Projects Analysis.
BONAVENTURE AND THE SIN OF THE CHURCH.
NEW VOICES IN THE TRADITION: MEDIEVAL HAGIOGRAPHY REVISITED.
WALTER KASPER ON THE THEOLOGY AND THE PRAXIS OF THE BISHOP'S OFFICE.
CATHERINE MOWRY LaCUGNA'S CONTRIBUTION TO TRINITARIAN THEOLOGY.
RESPONSIBILITY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS: CONTRIBUTIONS FROM BERNARD LONERGAN.
THE DUAL VOCATION OF CHRISTIAN PARENTS.
THE THEOLOGICAL NOTES AND THE INTERPRETATION OF DOCTRINE.
EUCHARISTIC SHARING: REVISING THE QUESTION.
THE ORDINARY UNIVERSAL MAGISTERIUM: UNRESOLVED QUESTIONS.
Bioenergy Today.
Biobased Industrial Products.
Machine Vision Sees the Food Contaminants We Can't See.
For You, the Consumer.
ORGANIC GROWS ON AMERICA!
Bt Corn Not a Threat to Monarchs.
Getting Atop Climbing Fern.
PAM Protects Against Pollutants and Pathogens.
The Alfalfa Factory. (cover story)
Where's the Bt?
It's a Bug's Life Showcasing the National Entomological Collection.
ZOOMING IN ON ZINC.
U.S. National Arboretum: Still Beautiful at 75. (cover story)
The Living Dead.
Predicting the Perfect Moments in Farming.
LOST LAMBS.
Draining the Land Without Polluting the Waters.
CO[sub2] Research.
Working With Nature To Keep the Chesapeake Healthy.
Improved Land-Management Practices Protect Watershed lakes.
GLOMALIN.
SALSA Speeds Solutions for Water-Scarce Southwest.
Cautious Reconciliation: The Change in Societal-Military Relations in Germany and Japan Since the End of the Cold War.
Complete Access: Women in the Bundeswehr and Male Ambivalence.
The Mutiny Wagon Wheel: A Leadership Model for Mutiny in Combat.
British Pakistani Muslims' Perceptions of the Armed Forces.
How Not to Institutionalize Civilian Control: Kenya's Coup Prevention Strategies, 1964-1997.
Theories of Democratic Civil-Military Relations.
The Second Generation Problematic: Rethinking Democracy and Civil-Military Relations.
Towards Civilian Supremacy: Civil-Military Relations in Taiwan's Democratization.
Warfare and Welfare: Military Service, Combat, and Marital Dissolution.
Teaching Poetry to Soldiers in a Post-Heroic Age.
The Plight of the Russian Military: Shallow Identity and Self-defeating Culture.
Scientists versus Whaling: Science, Advocacy, and Errors of Judgment.
An International Assessment of Agricultural Science and Technology.
Female Song Sparrows Prefer Males That Learn Well.
A Look Back at the International Biodiversity Observation Year.
Homospory 2002: An Odyssey of Progress in Pteridophyte Genetics and Evolutionary Biology.
Questionable Utility of the Frontier Forest Concept.
Renewable Energy: Current and Potential Issues.
Do Snakes Meter Venom?
How to Avoid Train Wrecks When Using Science in Environmental Problem Solving.
The Imperative of Macroeconomics for Ecologists.
Charting New Territory: Alaska's Seamounts.
Rain and Rodents: Complex Dynamics of Desert Consumers.
The Ecology and Evolutionary History of an Emergent Disease: Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome.
Impacts and Recovery from Multiple Hurricanes in a Piedmont-Coastal Plain River System.
Aspen, Elk, and Fire: The Effects of Human Institutions on Ecosystem Processes.
Bulgaria's Energy Sector. (cover story)
What Next for IPCC?
POLICY OPTIONS FOR IMPROVING ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR.
Mercury in the Environment: A Volatile Problem. (cover story)
The Journal of Information Systems: A Review of the First 15 Years.
International Lumberyards, Inc.: An Information System Consulting Case.
An Examination of Topical Coverage for the First Accounting Information Systems Course.
Does the Year 2000 XBRL Taxonomy Accommodate Current Business Financial-Reporting Practice?
Impression Management with Graphs: Effects on Choices.
Discussion of Impression Management with Graphs: Effects on Choices.
Reply to Discussion of Impact of Information Technology on Public Accounting Firm Productivity.
computing.
Changing times.
OLD KING COLE. (cover story)
computing.
FLUID HANDLING AND FLUID POWER.
new PRODUCTS.
HOT STUFF.
SCADA vs. The Hackers.
No turn of the screw.
The ASME Foundation ANNUAL REPORT 2001-2002.
ASME International ANNUAL REPORT 2001-2002.
Computing.
technology FOCUS.
new PRODUCTS.
Plenty of room in the air.
Organ on the Wall.
NUKES AND RUBBER.
Elections to the Fellow Grade.
Computing.
Technology focus.
New products.
Ticket to Ride.
FEA finds its place.
Transition Engineering.
the resource file.
ASME Codes & Standards.
Computing.
New PRODUCTS.
DESIGNING FOR SABOTAGE.
Brawn + brains › 1.
Keeping in touch.
Into Thick Air.
Telescopic Therapy.
WALTER BAADE MASTER OBSERVER.
A UNIVERSE from NOTHING.
Beyond the Equations: The Night Sky, Spirituality, and Masada.
Astronomy Down Under.
The Ultimate Telescope.
FLYING TELESCOPES.
Jupiter's Moons and the Longitude Problem.
Carrie Buck's Daughter.
Spurred On to Greater Depths.
Cosmos on the Table.
GROUND BREAKERS OF PATAGONIA.
Trading Places.
A Superorganism's Fuzzy Boundaries.
Cheaters and Chumps.
Hollywood Nights.
The Rise and Fall of the Nasal Empire.
Jamming Cicadas.
The Ice Above, the Fire Below.
A Beautiful Hand.
Avian Quick-Change Artists. (cover story)
Hitchin' a Ride.
On Being Baffled.
Desire Under the Figs.
The Making of a Blossom.
An American Fantasy.
Little Loggers Make a Big Difference.
Can Nature Be Declawed?
Plains Song.
The Once and Future Male.
Alive and Whale.
Their Game Is Mud.
Once Upon a Milkweed.
Recording the Spirit World.
Caution: Species Crossing.
Physics Nobel Prize Is Awarded to Giacconi, Davis, and Koshiba.
Chemistry Nobel Laureates Helped Develop Tools to Study Large Biological Molecules.
Scientists Put Their Minds to Policy and Diplomacy.
CLIMATE SHOCK: ABRUPT CHANGES OVER MILLENNIAL TIME SCALES.
INTERGALACTIC MAGNETIC FIELDS.
DIEDERIK KORTEWEG, PIONEER OF CRITICALITY.
NEW PRODUCTS: FOCUS ON LABORATORY EQUIPMENT.
Optical Society Presents Prizes at Annual Meeting.
OBITUARIES: Franco Rasetti.
Investigation Finds That One Lucent Physicist Engaged in Scientific Misconduct.
CERN Group Detects More than 100 Antihydrogens.
Beam Balance Helps Settle Down Measurement of the Gravitational Constant.
Germany Reviews Big Physics Projects, Triggers Furor over Spallation Source.
President's Science Council Urges More Money for Physical Sciences, Engineering.
NEWS NOTES.
BROWNIAN MOTORS.
EARTHQUAKE-VOLCANO INTERACTIONS. (cover story)
FRACTIONAL KINETICS.
NEW BOOKS.
NEW PRODUCTS.
OBITUARIES.
Do Atomic Force Microscope Arrays Have the Write Stuff?
Solar and Space Physics Get a Detailed 10-Year Plan.
TOWARD A SYNTHESIS OF THE NEWTONIAN AND DARWINIAN WORLDVIEWS.
OPTICAL STUDIES OF SINGLE QUANTUM DOTS.
EUGENE WIGNER, NUCLEAR ENGINEER.
NEW PRODUCTS.
Nikolai Gennadievich Basov.
Lawrence Berkley Lab Concludes that Evidence of Element 118 Was a Fabrication.
Evidence Found for a New Type of Radioactivity: Two-Proton Emission.
The Unusual Thermodynamics of Microscopic Systems.
Probing the Nanomechanics of Cartilage with Atomic Force Microscopy.
European Commission Prods EU to Unify Research Base.
RADIATION IN THE TREATMENT OF CANCER.
THE PHYSICS OF INTENSITY-MODULATED RADIATION THERAPY.
Pittsburgh 2002 PSA International Conference of Photography.
haveyouwondered...
News.
George Butt.
News.
Collodian at Yosemite.
2002 International Bulletin Contest Results.
Photographing Rugby.
news notes.
COMPUTER NEWS.
CLASSROOM AIDS.
Computer News.
News Notes.
Computer News.
Heaven & Earth.
news notes.
Fun with Learning and Recall.
COMPUTER NEWS.
CLASSROOM AIDS.
Ultraviolet Disinfection of Drinking Water.
Old Dog, New Tricks.
The Challenges of Stormwater Management.
Situation Normal.
Evaluation of a Chlorine Dioxide Secondary Disinfection System.
TECHNOLOGY FOCUS.
Plant Combines Wastewater Treatment and Energy Conservation.
TECHNOLOGY FOCUS.
Profits in People: Training Helps Plants Fill Gaps.
Application Profile.
A Common Sense Approach to Design.
Recent Advancements in Wastewater Sludge Composting.
The Standard Septic System: Still an Effective Choice for Onsite Wastewater Treatment. (cover story)
Close the Book. It's Time to Read.
Watch Out for the Fool's Gold!
A Crash Course in Media Literacy.
Developing a Critical Awareness of the Hidden Curriculum through Media Literacy.
Impressionable Minds, Indelible Images.
What, Me Worry?.
Whatever Works.
An Academy for Ophelia?
Art and Anger Management.
Intrusive Searches Can Prove Troublesome for Public School Officials.
The Realities of Middle School for Mexican Children.
Systems Thinking Can Improve Teacher Retention.
Dropping in a Mouse Reading Poetry with Our Students.
Show, Don't Tell The Importance of Explicit Prewriting Instruction.
Mathematics Standards, Cultural Styles, and Learning Preferences The Plight and the Promise of African American Students.
The Student-Managed Investment Fund at the High School Level.
The ABCs of Managing Teacher Stress.
Building Schools as Caring Communities Why, What, and How?
Net Effects of Institutional Type on Baccalaureate Degree Attainment of "Traditional" Students.
A Case Study of Select Illinois Community College Board Chair Perspectives on Their Leadership Role.
Building a System of Autonomous Institutions: Coordination and Collaboration in British Columbia's Community College, University College, and Institute System.
ERIC Review: The Impact of Financial Crises on Access and Support Services in Community Colleges.
Community and Diversity in Urban Community Colleges: Coursetaking Among Entering Students.
Sustaining Innovation in Technological Education.
Demographic Risk Factors, Study Patterns, and Campus Involvement as Related to Student Success Among Guilford Technical Community College Students.
An Examination of Student Cheating in the Two-Year College.
Editor's Choice: The Worklife of Student Service Professionals at Rural Community Colleges.
ERIC Review: Understanding the Relationships Between Proprietary Schools and Community Colleges: Findings from Recent Literature.
Stress Factors and Community College Deans: TheStresses of Their Role Identified.
The Influence of the Rural Community CollegeInitiative on Increasing Civic Capacity in DistressedRural Communities.
Editor's Choice: Becoming Student CenteredVia the One-Stop Shop Initiative: A Case Study ofOnondaga Community College.
UCLA Community College Review: Community CollegePartnership with the Private Sector--OrganizationalContexts and Models for Successful Collaboration.
Help wanted: Preparing community college leadersin a new century (Book).
FOUNDATIONS FOR LEARNER-CENTERED EDUCATION: A KNOWLEDGE BASE.
THE NEWLY DEVELOPED CONFLUENCE SCORE TESTS CREDITABILITY OF TEST TAKER-MAKING OLDER TEST WITHOUT ONE A RELIC OF THE PAST.
FORENSIC COUNSELING: A NEW APPROACH TO SCHOOL CRIME.
THE MATHEMATICS AND SCIENCE ACHIEVEMENT GAP BETWEEN RESEGREGATED AND DESEGREGATED SCHOOLS.
OVERREPRESENTATION OF MINORITY STUDENTS IN SPECIAL EDUCATION.
TOWARD AN UNDERSTANDING OF CELLULAR SOCIOLOGY AND ITS RELATIONSHIPS TO CELLULAR BIOLOGY.
NEURO-LINGUISTIC PROGRAMMING: DECIPHERING TRUTH IN THE CRIMINAL MIND.
PERSONALITY TYPE AS A PREDICTOR OF TEACHING EFFICACY AND CLASSROOM CONTROL IN EMERGENCY CERTIFICATION TEACHERS.
YOUNG ADOLESCENT GIRLS' EXPERIENCE OF NON-CLINICAL DEPRESSION.
RITALIN UPDATE FOR COUNSELORS, TEACHERS, AND PARENTS.
EVALUATION OF THE GANG RESISTANCE AND TRAINING (GREAT) PROGRAM: A SCHOOL-BASED PREVENTION PROGRAM.
THE IMPACT OF HOPE, PROCRASTINATION, AND SOCIAL ACTIVITY ON ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE OF MIDWESTERN COLLEGE STUDENTS.
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF IMPROVING TEACHING QUALITY.
CARDINAL SHIFTS IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT IN SOUTH AFRICA.
SELECTING THE BEST TEACHER CANDIDATES: CAN A GROUP INTERVIEW HELP?
PREDICTORS OF SCHOOL AND NURSING SERVICE MANAGERS' COPING ABILITY.
META-COGNITIVE ANALYSIS: AN ALTERNATIVE TO LITERATURE REVIEWS AND META-ANALYSIS FOR THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS.
KNOWING ECONOMIC THEORY: APPLYING THE REFLECTIVE JUDGMENT MODEL IN INTRODUCTORY ECONOMICS.
DETERMINING THE INFLUENCES OF TRADITIONAL TEXAS TEACHERS VS. TEACHERS IN THE EMERGENCY TEACHING CERTIFICATION PROGRAM.
NEW LITERACIES, STANDARDS, AND TEACHER EDUCATION.
FROM CRISIS TO GROWTH. . . RACE, CULTURE, ETHNICITY, CONFLICT AND CHANGE.
HOW MENTOR TEACHERS PERCEIVE THEIR ROLES AND RELATIONSHIPS IN A FIELD-BASED TEAHCER-TRAINING PROGRAM.
USING TOTAL QUALITY TO ACHIEVE CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT IN THE CLASSROOM.
THE RESEARCHER AS RESEARCH INSTRUMENT IN EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH: A POSSIBLE THREAT TO TRUSTWORTHINESS? (A: RESEARCH&#95INSTRUMENT).
At Risk Children in Resegregated Schools: An Analysis of the Achievement Gap.
Historical Change in the Cognitive and Affective Language of Teaching.
Why Is Your Homework Not Done? How Theories of Development Affect Your Approach in the Classroom.
The Roles of Grandparents In Educating Today's Children.
Implementing the Multicultural Education Perspective into the Nursing Education Curriculum.
Utilization of Counseling Services by International Students.
High and Low Achieving Education Students on Processing, Retaining, and Retrieval of Information.
The Relationship Between Tolerance for Ambiguity and Need for Course Structure.
The Use of Assessment in Improving Technology-based Instruction Programs.
Research Skills and the New Undergraduate.
Infusion of Technology into the Curriculum.
Personality Indicators and Emergency Permit Teachers' Willingness to Embrace Technology.
Psychological Barriers Associated With Matriculation of African American Students In Predominantly White Institutions.
Comparison of Cross-cultural Course Changes: From Traditional Lecture Course to Contemporary course with Biblio-learning, Video-learning, and Experiential Exercises.
The Impact of Ethnic Identification on Student Learning in the HBCU Classroom.
Formative Classroom Assessment Using Cooperative Groups: Vygotsky and Random Assignment.
To Attend or Not To Attend: Is that a Good Question?
School-Based Interventions for Treating Social Adjustment Difficulties in Children with Traumatic Brain Injury.
Philosophy and Measurement of School Achievement.
Chosinness and the THEOLOGY OF TERROR.
Relationship between Student Characteristics and Ethics: Implications for Educators.
A Conversation With Annemarie Roeper: A View From the Self.
Philosophy and Theory in the Study of Gifted Children.
To Produce or Not to Produce? Understanding Boredom and theHonor in Underachievement.
Ability Grouping Is Not Just Tracking Anymore.
Mentoring Empowers Gifted/Learning Disabled Students toSoar!
Pretend Play and Maternal Scaffolding: Comparisons ofToddlers With Advanced Development, Typical Development, andHearing Impairment.
An Homage to Ruthan Brodsky.
The Young Gifted Girl: A Contemporary View.
Two Steps Forward, One Step Back: Effect Size Reporting inGifted Education Research from 1995-2000.
Gifted or ADHD? The Possibilities of Misdiagnosis.
Giftedness in Early Childhood: The Search for Complexityand Connection.
TV Literacy and Academic/Artistic Giftedness: UnderstandingTime Leaps and Time Lags.
Development of a Student Perception Inventory.
In Whose Eyes? Parents' Perspectives on the Learning Needsof Their Gifted Children.
A Comparison Between Intellectually Gifted and TypicalChildren in Their Coping Responses to a School and a PeerStressor.
Toward A New Model for Promoting Urban Children's Mental Health: Accessible, Effective, and Sustainable School-Based Mental Health Services.
Commentary: Building Community Laboratories for Experimental Studies.
Commentary: The Conspicuous Invisibility of Black Ways of Being: Missing Data in New Models of Children's Mental Health.
Commentary: New Models for School-Based Mental Health Services.
Commentary: Establishing Efficient and Durable Systems of School-Based Support.
WHAT SCHOOLS CAN DO TO HELP GAY/LESBIAN/BISEXUAL YOUTH: A HARM REDUCTION APPROACH.
ADOLESCENT GIRLS' PERCEPTONS OF GOODNESS AND BADNESS AND THE ROLE OF WILL IN THEIR BEHAVIORAL DECISIONS.
SCHOOL-YEAR EMPLOYMENT AMONG HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS: EFFECTS ON ACADEMIC, SOCIAL, AND PHYSICAL FUNCTIONING.
THE ASSOCIATION OF ECOLOGICAL VARIABLES AND PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTRESS WITH EXPOSURE TO COMMUNTY VIOLENCE AMONG ADOLESCENTS.
THE CULTURAL ADJUSTMENT AND MENTAL HEALTH OF JAPANESE IMMIGRANT YOUTH.
THE IMPACT OF A HISTORY OF SEXUAL ABUSE ON HIGH-RISK SEXUAL BEHAVIORS AMONG FEMALES ATTENDING ALTERNATIVE SCHOOLS.
PEER REFERENCING IN ADOLESCENT DECISION MAKING AS A FUNCTION OF PERCEIVED PARENTING STYLE.
MASSAGE THERAPY IMPROVES MOOD AND BEHAVIOR OF STUDENTS WITH ATTENTION-DEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER.
THEORETICAL STRUCTURE OF ADOLESCENT ALIENATION: A MULTIGROUP CONFIRMATORY FACTOR ANALYSIS.
VALIDATION OF HEALTH LOCUS OF CONTROL PATTERNS IN SWEDISH ADOLESCENTS.
STUDENT ATHLETES' PERCEPTIONS OF SELF.
MATERNAL PERCEPTIONS AND ADOLESCENT SELF-ESTEEM: A SIX-YEAR LONGITUDINAL STUDY.
COLLEGE STUDENT RISK-TAKING FROM THREE PERSPECTIVES.
STUDENTS' PERSPECTIVES ON THEIR HIGH SCHOOL EXPERIENCE.
EVALUATION OF AN INDIVIDUALIZED TREATMENT PROGRAM FOR ADOLESCENT SHOPLIFTERS.
BULLYING AND VICTIMIZATION: PREVALENCE AND RELATIONSHIP TO GENDER, GRADE LEVEL, ETHNICITY, SELF-ESTEEM, AND DEPRESSION.
ACCULTURATION, COMMUNICATION PATTERNS, AND SELF-ESTEEM AMONG ASIAN AND CAUCASIAN AMERICAN ADOLESCENTS.
The Music of the Bahian Caboclos.
Iran and the United States: Postmodern Culture Conflict in Action.
Rereading Sex and Temperament: Margaret Mead's Sepik Triptych and its Ethnographic Critics.
Outcome-Based Tyranny: Teaching Compliance While Testing Like A State.
The Great Kanto Earthquake and the Massacre of Koreans in 1923: Notes on Japan's Modern National Sovereignty.
Marginality and Subjectivity in the Haitian Diaspora.
Shi'a Women's Rituals in Northwest Pakistan: The Shortcomings and Significance of Resistance.
Lifeline to Byzantium.
Pompeii's Block of Time.
Spoils of War.
Voices from the Ashes.
Reviving a Radiant Canvas.
A River Rising.
Back to the Old Place.
Man of 1000 Faces.
Atlantis of the Baltic.
Mystery Mummy.
What Can We Learn from a Maya Vase?
THE PEPPER WRECK.
Searching for the First New Zealanders.
When Spells Worked Magic.
The Guns of Mehrgarh.
Prehistory of Warfare.
First Lady of Amazonia.
The Well-Dressed DEAD.
Mixed Messages.
Far-Out Television.
Coping with Chaos.
Saving a Fabled Sanctuary.
Ruins on the Rapids.
In the Shadow of the Wall.
Picture Perfect.
City of the Hawk.
Assault on Tradition.
Faking Biblical History.
Cloak & Trowel.
Solstice at the Stones.
Extreme Sport.
Spirited Explorer.
Timor's Safe Havens.
TRANSPLANTING PILGRIMAGE TRADITIONS IN THE AMERICAS.
USING UPLAND FOREST IN SHIMENTAI NATURE RESERVE, CHINA.
SOCIAL CAPITAL, DEVELOPMENT, AND INDIGENOUS POLITICSIN ECUADORIAN AMAZONIA.
AMERICAN NATIONAL IDENTITY AND THE PROGRESS OF THENEW SOUTH IN NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC MAGAZINE.
VISIONS OF LA GÉOGRAPHIE HUMAINE INTWENTIETH-CENTURY FRANCE.
JEDDAH'S ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS.
LANGUAGE, IDENTITY, AND THE SCRIPTORIAL LANDSCAPE IN QUÉBEC AND CATALONIA.
PUBLIC MEMORY AND POLITICAL POWER IN GUATEMALA'S POSTCONFLICT LANDSCAPE.
MUSLIMS, HINDUS, AND SIKHS IN THE NEW RELIGIOUS LANDSCAPE OF ENGLAND.
IDENTITY AND ASSIMILATION AMONG YOUNG ETHIOPIAN IMMIGRANTS IN METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON.
A FOOD GEOGRAPHY OF THE GREAT PLAINS.
CHOICES AND VOICES: Participation of People with HIV on Ryan White Title II Consumer Advisory Boards.
PSYCHIATRIC REHABILITATION: An Empowerment-Based Approach to Mental Health Services.
DESIGNING SOCIAL MARKETING STRATEGIES TO INCREASE AFRICAN AMERICANS' ACCESS TO HEALTH PROMOTION PROGRAMS.
DIFFERENCES AND SIMILARITIES BETWEEN SOCIAL WORK AND NURSE DISCHARGE PLANNERS.
BURDEN OF CARE AND CHILDHOOD CANCER: Experiences of Parents in an Asian Context.
The Unraveling of Managed Care: Recent Trends and Implications.
DENIAL OF AOD USE: An Issue for Social Workers and the Profession.
READINESS TO ADOPT BEST PRACTICES AMONG ADOLESCENTS' AOD TREATMENT PROVIDERS.
Demographic and Clinical Correlates of Client Motivation among Substance Abusers.
HARM REDUCTION: A Social Work Practice Model and Social Justice Agenda.
PATTERNS OF CHANGE IN MARITAL RELATIONSHIPS AMONG PARENTS OF CHILDREN WITH CANCER.
SEXUAL FUNCTIONING FOLLOWING RENAL TRANSPLANTATION.
ALCOHOL USE AMONG PREGNANT AFRICAN AMERICAN WOMEN: Ecological Considerations.
DECISION MAKING BY THE CHILD PROTECTION TEAM OF A MEDICAL CENTER.
ETHICAL DECISION MAKING: Pressure and Uncertainty as Complicating Factors.
PROSTATE CANCER AND PSYCHOSOCIAL CONCERNS IN AFRICAN AMERICAN MEN: Literature Synthesis and Recommendations.
Successful Ways to Increase Retention in a Longitudinal Study of Lead-Exposed Children.
Medicare and Premium Support: A Social Work Perspective.
The Kansas Tort Claims Act: Implications for PhysicalEducators.
An Integrated Approach to the Introductory BiomechanicsCourse.
Factors That Influence Career Choice of African AmericanStudents to Enter the Adapted Physical Education Profession.
Are Physical Education Classes Encouraging Students to bePhysically Active?: Experiences of Ninth Graders in their LastSemester of Required Physical Education.
The Effects of a School Physical Education and Health WebSite on Parental Knowledge of the Program.
Application of Orff and Dalcroze Activities in Preschool Children: Do They Affect the Level of Rhythmic Ability?
'Physical Culture Down Through the Ages: Now the 21st Century Looms Before Us'.
The Reality of Fitness for Pre-Service Teachers: What Physical Education Majors 'Know and Can Do'.
The Relationship Between the Perceptions of Students and Instructors of the Importance of Their Objectives in Physical Education Activity Classes.
Academic Excellence Must Include Physical Education.
Fostering Advocacy Among Our Primary Partners: ProvidingQuality PETE For Future Elementary Classroom Teachers.
Feedback Profiles of Cooperating Teachers Supervising theSame Student Teacher.
Students' Perspective in the Design and Implementation ofthe Physical Education Cirriculum.
A Reflective Framework From a Preservice Teacher'sPerspective.
What to tell the kids about sex.
What was Leo Strauss up to?
Do we need more scientists?
Snow's two cultures -- and ours.
Defining the "peace party".
The behavioral aspects of poverty.
A new strategy for the new geopolitics.
The new class vs. social democracy.
Child experiments.
The sources of urban renewal.
Family ties.
Wise guys.
Ex-convicts in society.
A genealogy of anti-Americanism.
Breaking the drug-crime link.
The Martin Luther King we remember.
Measuring achievement: the West and the rest.
Women at religious colleges--subordination or secularization?
Education for profit.
The Contributions of John Money: A Personal View.
History, Causality, and Sexology.
The Effect of Stimulus Content on Volunteering for Sexual Interest Research Among College Students.
Straw Men and Fairy Tales: Evaluating Reactions to A Natural History of Rape.
The Amount and Timing of Parent-Adolescent Sexual Communication as Predictors of Late Adolescent Sexual Risk-Taking Behaviors.
Recalling Sexual Behavior: A Methodological Analysis of Memory Recall Bias via Interview Using the Diary as the Gold Standard.
Intercourse Debut Age: Poor Resources, Problem Behavior, or Romantic Appeal? A Population-Based Longitudinal Study.
Partner Influence on Noncondom Use: Gender and Ethnic Differences.
Sexuality Attitudes: The Impact of Trauma.
Coital Debut: The Role of Religiosity and Sex Attitudes in the Add Health Survey.
Sexual Modes Questionnaire: Measure to Assess the Interaction Among Cognitions, Emotions, and Sexual Response.
Toward Improved Interpretation and Theory Building of African American Male Sexualities.
Characteristics of Men and Women Who Complete or Exit From an On-Line Internet Sexuality Questionnaire: A Study of Instrument Dropout Biases.
Emotional Reactions Toward Procedural Fairness as a Function of Negative Information.
Social Dominance and Ethical Ideology: The End Justifies the Means?
The Need for Closure and the Spontaneous Use of Complex and Simple Cognitive Structures.
Student Prejudice Against Gay Male and Lesbian Lecturers.
Relational Message Interpretations of Nonverbal Matching Behavior: An Application of the Social Meaning Model.
Human Affection Exchange: II. Affectionate Communication in Father-Son Relationships.
The Effects of Culture and Cohesiveness on Intragroup Conflict and Effectiveness.
Perceived Intergroup Threat and Attitudes of Host Community Members Toward Immigrant Acculturation.
The Elusive Nature of Self-Measurement: The Self-Construal Scale Versus the Twenty Statements Test.
Sexual Aggression and Sports Participation.
The Predictability of Coaching Efficacy on Team Efficacy and Player Efficacy in Volleyball.
Team Quality and Game Location Effects in English Professional Soccer.
The Effects of Park and Urban Settings on the Moods and Cognitive Strategies of Female Runners.
Sport Fans' Attitudes Toward War Analogies as Descriptors for Sport.
The Effects of Head and Assistant Coaches' Uses of Humor on Collegiate Soccer Players' Evaluation of Their Coaches.
The Black Ferns: The Experiences of New Zealand's Elite Women Rugby Players.
The Measurement of Goal Orientations in Exercise.
The Role of Relative Autonomy in Post-Exercise Affect Responding.
Relational Aggression and Psychosocial Adjustment in Intercollegiate Athletes.
Characteristics Associated with Superstitious Behavior in Track and Field Athletes: Are There NCAA Divisional Level Differences?
Voices of Male Athletes on Drug Use, Drug Testing, and the Existing Order in Intercollegiate Athletics.
The Effect of Sport Setting on Fan Attendance Motivation: The Case of Minor League Vs. Collegiate Baseball.
Competition and Intrinsic Motivation in Physical Activity: A Comparison of Two Groups.
A Qualitative Analysis of How the Timing of the Onset of Sports Injuries Influences Athlete Reactions.
Blood, Sweat, and Jeers: The Impact of the Media's Heterosexist Portrayals on Perceptions of Male and Female Athletes.
Field Dependence-Independence and Sports with a Preponderance of Closed or Open Skill.
Social Physique Anxiety, Body Dissatisfaction and Self-Esteem in College Females of Differing Exercise Frequency, Perceived Weight Discrepancy, and Race.
Romantic Crossings: Making Love, Family, and Non-Whiteness in California, 1925--1950.
A Demographic and Social Profile of Quebec City's Irish Populations, 1842--1861.
'No Italian Spoken for the Duration of the War': Language, Italian-American Identity, and Cultural Pluralism in the World War II Years.
Southern Jewish Women and Their Social Service Organizations.
Foreign Policy, National Identity, and Citizenship: The Roosevelt White House and the Expediency of Repeal.
Globalization, Latinization, and the Nuevo New South.
Between Languages and Discourse: Russian Americanists in Search of Definition.
Transnational American Studies and the Limits to Collaboration: Implications Drawn From the Russian-U.S. Relationship.
'Horrified and Proud:' Cold War Ethics in American and Russian Acts of Remembering.
'Who is to Blame? What is to be Done?': Joint Ventures with Russian Americanists in the 1990s.
Crossing Borders, Shifting Paradigms: The Perspectives of American Studies/Cultural Studies in Eastern Europe.
The Twain Shall Meet: American Studies in Post-Soviet Russia.
American Literature in the Context of Russian-American Studies: Research and Curricula.
The Reception of American Transcendentalism in Russia.
The Ideologem of Loss in Chekov and James.
Communication "in the Higher Sense": Young Thoreau and Young Dostoyevski.
The Holy Fool in Russian and American Culture: A Dialogue.
A Case for American Studies: The Michael Fay Affair, Singapore-US Relations, and American Studies in Singapore.
Stratified Whiteness and Sexualized Chinese Immigrants in San Franciso: The Report of the California Special Committee on Chinese Immigration in 1876.
Robert Laxalt: A Basque Pioneer in the American Literary West.
Rights of the Sea: Toward a Global Understanding.
SOCIAL POLICY IN THE ARAB WORLD: IRAQ AS A CASE STUDY.
WOMEN AND EMPOWERMENT IN THE ARAB WORLD.
MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES IN THE ARAB WORLD.
MARITAL PROBLEMS AMONG ARAB FAMILIES: BETWEEN CULTURAL AND FAMILY THERAPY INTERVENTIONS.
PRINCIPLES OF SOCIAL WORK PRACTICE IN THE MUSLIM ARAB WORLD.
A DISCOVERY VOYAGE OF SELF AND OTHER: FADWA TUQAN'S SOJOURN IN ENGLAND IN THE EARLY SIXTIES.
THE SOCIAL CONTEXT OF PRE-ISLAMIC POETRY: POETIC IMAGERY AND SOCIAL REALITY IN THE MU&...;ALLAQAT.
THE KOENIG REPORT AND ISRAELI POLICY TOWARDS THE PALESTINIAN MINORITY, 1965-1976: OLD WINE IN NEW BOTTLES.
FANATICISM: A MAJOR OBSTACLE IN THE MUSLIM---CHRISTIAN DIALOGUE. THE CASE OF TWENTIETH CENTURY ISLAMIC FUNDAMENTALISM.
EDITOR'S NOTES.
TERRORISM: FROM SAMSON TO ATTA.
The Ideological Paradigm Shifts of China's World Views: From Marxism-Leninism-Maoism to the Pragmatism-Multilateralism of the Deng-Jiang-Hu Era.
The Stability of Nuclear Deterrence in South Asia: The Clash between State and Antistate Actors.
U.S.-East Asian Trade Friction: Exit and Voice in the Steel Trade Regime.
Is the European Exchange Rate Mechanism a Model for East Asia?
Russia and Pakistan: The Difficult Path to Rapprochement.
Precarious Partnership: Pakistan's Response to U.S. Security Policies.
A Late Honeymoon for Bush and China: Enjoy It While It lasts.
The Hermit Mouse Roars: North Korea.
Grudging Partner: South Korea.
High Hopes: India's Response to U.S. Security Policies.
Still Great Mates: Australia and the United States.
Let's Just Be Friends: New Zealand and the United States.
The Glacier Moves: Japan's Response to U.S. Security Policies.
Reluctant Partner: Indonesia.
A Marriage of Convenience: Russia and U.S. Foreign Policy.
Does European Integration Provide a Model for Moderating Cross-Strait Relations?
That Was Then.
The Privatization of Foreign Aid.
The Case for Cultural Diplomacy.
China's New Diplomacy.
China Takes Off.
Should Hezbollah Be Next?
Reinventing the West.
Japan's New Nationalism.
America's Imperial Dilemma.
The Next Prize.
The Baby Trade.
Clinton's Strong Defense Legacy.
Being Yasir Arafat.
Remaking the World.
The Other 9/11.
Bridges, Bombs, or Bluster?
Rebuilding the Atlantic Alliance.
Engaging Failing States.
Stumbling Into War.
Why America Still Needs the United Nations.
Taking Arabs Seriously.
New Battle Stations?
Bush and Foreign Aid.
EDITOR'S FOREWARD.
'STATE FEMINISM' AND WOMEN'S MOVEMENTS: The Impact of Chile's Servicio Nacional de la Mujer on Women's Activism.
LATIN AMERICAN CLASS STRUCTURES: Their Composition and Change during the Neoliberal Era.
EFFECTS OF EMPLOYMENT, WAGES, AND LABOR STANDARDS OF NON-TRADITIONAL EXPORT CROPS IN NORTHEAST BRAZIL.
A HISTORY OF THE NEW PHILOLOGY AND THE NEW PHILOLOGY IN HISTORY.
CATTLE, CORRUPTION, AND VENEZUELAN STATE FORMATION DURING THE REGIME OF JUAN VICENTE G&OACUTE;MEZ, 1908-35.
HOUSE, STREET, COLLECTIVE: Revolutionary Geographies and Gender Transformation in Nicaragua, 1979-99.
CAMPESINOS AND MEXICAN FOREST POLICY DURING THE TWENTIETH CENTURY.
Using GIS ans GPS Technology as an Instructional Tool.
Leadership: Part of the Civic Mission of School?
Learning Style--Based Teaching to Raise Minority Student Test Scores.
Making History Come Alive with the Nonfiction Literature of the Vietnam War.
The Dynamics of One-on-One Teaching.
Teaching about Older People in the Social Studies Curriculum--The Participation in Government Class.
Understanding and Preventing Burnout among Social Studies Teachers in Africa.
Beyond Marquee Morality: Virtue in the Social Studies.
Using Children's Literature and the Universals of Culture to Teach about Mexico.
Teaching Preservice Social Studies Teachers to Be Advocates for Social Change.
Political Indoctrination in the Curriculum during Four Periods of Elementary School Education in Taiwan.
What We Talk about When We Talk about Social Studies.
Social Studies, Solidarity, and a Sense of Self.
Bringing the Ocean into the Social Studies Classroom.
The Nation's Capital and First Graders.
Prediction Making within a Historical Context.
A Social Studies Wax Museum: Meeting Famous Americans without Leaving School.
Where Does Social Studies Fit in a High-Stakes Testing Environment?
Assessment Traps in K-12 Social Studies.
Asia vs. Europe: Conceptual Framework of the High School World History Curriculum in South Korea.
Perceptions of National Identity: How Adolescents in the United States and Norway View Their Own and Other Countries.
Africa at the Venice Biennale.
Illuminated Signs.
African Art at the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston.
Adamma.
High Museum of Art Atlanta, Georgia.
Beyond Statistics.
A Crisis in Connoisseurship?
Ikiyan Aru.
Defining African Art.
Tarrying with Our Negatives (and Positives).
A Tribute to Roy Sieber.
Lamba Hoany.
The Curator-Conservator Collaboration Remembering Roy Sieber.
Symbolically Inscribing the City.
The Incidental Photographer.
The Contours of Tolerance: Jews and the Corpus Domini Altarpiece in Urbino.
A Palace of One's Own: Stanislas I's Kiosks and the Idea of Self-Representation.
France Embraces Millet: The Intertwined Fates of The Gleaners and The Angelus.
Viewing the Archive: Timothy O'Sullivan's Photographs for the Wheeler Survey, 1871-74.
Bauhaus Theater of Human Dolls.
The Intimate Gallery and the Equivalents: Spirituality in the 1920s Work of Stieglitz.
READING AND WRITING PATRONIO'S DOCTRINE IN REAL ACADEMIA ESPAÑOLA MS 15.
QUIXOTIC MATERIALISM: AN ECONOMIC REPROCESSING OF CERVANTES'S IMAGINED WORLDS (A REVIEW ARTICLE).
COMPETING NARRATIVE DISCOURSES: (FE)MALE FABULATION IN THE EPISODE OF GRISÓSTOMO AND MARCELA.
RE-EVALUATING HERRERA'S SONNET XXXVIII: NOTES ON SENSE AND INTELLECT IN THE LYRIC PERSONA OF ALGUNAS OBRAS.
'THE BEST THUS FAR DISCOVERED': THE JAPANESE IN THE LETTERS OF FRANCISCO XAVIER.
ARCHITECTURAL CARTOGRAPHY: SOCIAL AND GENDER MAPPING IN MARÍA DE ZAYAS'S SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY SPAIN.
ANA OZORES'S NERVES.
RE-FRAMING DISCOURSE: WOMEN BEFORE THEIR PUBLIC IN MAR&IACUTE;A DE ZAYAS.
REWRITING HISTORY IN THE COPLAS DE LA PANADERA.
PIERRE MENARD AND THE SCHOOL OF SKEPTICS.
IN AND OUT OF TIME.
'ESTA SANGRE QUIERO': SECRETS AND DISCOVERY IN LOPE'S EL PERRO DEL HORTELANO.
THE CARAJICOMEDIA: THE EROTIC URGE AND THE DECONSTRUCTION OF IDEALIST LANGUAGE IN THE SPANISH RENAISSANCE.
Beginning Blues Improvisation Pedagogy for the Non-Jazz Specialist Music Educator.
Developing a Gospel Choir.
Team Teaching in the Secondary Instrumental Music Classroom.
MENC TODAY.
Developing Tomorrow's Music Teachers Today.
Managing the Music Classroom--You Can!
Learning across Disciplines: An Approach to West African Music.
Music Teachers and Music Therapists: Helping Children Together.
Whole Language in the Music Classroom: Part 1 of 2.
for your library.
MENC TODAY.
Whole language and Music-Listening Instruction: Part 2 of 2.
Good Rhythm and Intonation from Day One in Beginning Instrumental Music.
The Young Elementary School Chorus: An Introduction to Choral Singing.
No Hablo Inglés: Breaking the Language Barrier in Music Instruction.
Creative Experiences in Free Play.
for your library.
Powwow in the Classroom.
Planning for Success: The First Year and Beyond.
Teaching Music As Democratic Practice.
From an Administrator's Perspective: Practical Survival Skills for Music Educators.
An Alternative Approach to Developing Music Literacy Skills in a Transient Society.
Middle Eastern Expansions on Cultural Diversity in Music Education.
Sensitizing Students to Famous Operatic Arias and Voices.
Can Video Save the Radio Star? Using Music-plus-Video in the Classroom.
Teaching Musical Interpretations through Choral Rehearsals.
Making Composition Work in Your Music Program.
Geometry/Labor=Volume/Mass?
Toward a Theory of the Architectural Program.
Involuntary Prisoners of Architecture.
The Edge of Darkness: On W.G. Sebald.
W.G. Sebald.
Not Fade Away: The Face of German History in Michael Schmidt's Ein-heit.
Dada Gambits.
Dada Between Heaven and Hell: Abstraction and Universal Language in the Rhythm Films of Hans Richter.
Long Live Daddy.
The Work of Art and the Problem of Politics in Berlin Dada.
Introduction to the First International Dada Fair.
The Poetics of M.F.K. Fisher.
Toni Cade Bambara's Use of African American Vernacular English in "The Lesson"
The Role of Music in Gabriel Josipovici's Goldberg: Variations.
Negation as a Stylistic Feature in Joseph Heller's Catch-22: A Corpus Study.
Little Boxes: The Effects of the Stanza on Poetic Narrative.
Criminally Minded: The Stylistics of Justification in Contemporary American Crime Fiction.
Lawrence and the Creative Process.
The New School of Literary History in Russia.
M. A. K. Halliday's Continuum of Prose Styles and the Stylistic Analysis of Scientific Texts.
Scene Shift, Metalepsis, and the Metaleptic Mode.
Reflective Encounters: Illustrating Comparative Rhetoric.
LA LéGENDE DE SAINT JULIEN L'HOSPITALIER AND THE MEDIEVAL QUEST.
PETRARCH'S "CANZONE-FROTTOLA": A PARABLE OF RETURN.
HETEROTOPIAS AND COLLECTIONS IN BUTOR'S L'EMPLOI DU TEMPS.
A REAPPRAISAL OF THE "TOTAL" NOVEL: TOTALITY AND COMMUNICATIVE SYSTEMS IN CARLOS FUENTES'S TERRA NOSTRA.
SIGNS AND REALITY: THE TIGER EFFECT.
THE MIN-AND-BODY PROBLEM IN DIDEROT'S LE NEVEU DE RAMEAU.
THE POLITICS OF SCIENCE AND LITERATURE IN FRENCH AND RUSSIAN CRITICISM OF THE 1860s.
Distinction WITH A DIFFERENCE. (cover story)
The Most Vulnerable Clients.
Over THERE.
IN RULINGS, ECHOES OF 1992.
Cybercrime Fighters. (cover story)
SHELTER GAME.
Frequent Filers.
THE TOPE TEN IN TECH. (cover story)
HERDING Liberals.
Damaging DISRESPECT.
Caught in the Middle. (cover story)
Guarding the Cyberfort.
New Route for Class Actions.
Fee-Shifting Fallout.
Junior G-MEN. (cover story)
Fired...
SELLING YOUR CASE A Different Way.
ARBITRATION PENDULUM.
REVIEWING Rehnquist. (cover story)
Barrister IN THE BACKWOODS.
PUTTING THERAPEUTIC JURISPRUDENCE TO WORK.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR.
RISKING FAILURE. (cover story)
Cyber-Libertarians.
DECIPHERING the CODE.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR.
WE ARE Family. (cover story)
BOUNCED from the BAR.
the PaperWork WAR on TerrorisM.
EVIDENCE THAT POPS.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR.
Firms and Family.
Road to Recovery.
Good Governance: The Metamorphosis of a Policy Metaphor.
Local and Global: International Governance and Civil Society.
The Private Side of Global Governance.
Markets, Workers and Economic Reforms: Reconstructing East Asian Labor Systems.
The Precarious Revolution: Unchanging Institutions and the Fate of Reform in Iran.
Beyond the Orthodox Paradox: The Breakup of State-Business Coalitions in 1980s Turkey.
If I Do These Things, They Will Throw Me Out: Economic Reform and the Collapse of Indonesia's New Order.
Development Without Equality: An Interview with Raul Domingos.
Institutionalizing Global Wars: State Transformations in Columbia, 1978-2002.
In Search of Democratic Governance in Central America.
Reaching for Stability: Strengthening Civil Society-Donor Partnerships in East Timor.
Healing Governance? Four Health NGOs in War-Torn Eastern Congo.
Living Without a Government in Somalia: An Interview with Mark Bradbury.
DOES TECHNOLOGY SPELL TROUBLE WITH A CAPITAL "T"?: HUMAN DIGNITY AND PUBLIC POLICY.
RETRIBUTION: THE CENTRAL AIM OF PUNISHMENT.
DIGNITY AND DESERT IN PUNISHMENT THEORY.
INEVITABLE MENS REA.
POPE JOHN PAUL II AND THE DIGNITY OF THE HUMAN BEING.
RELIGIOUS LIBERTY AND HUMAN DIGNITY: A TALE OF TWO DECLARATIONS.
THE WELFARE DEBATE: GETTING PAST THE BUMPER STICKERS.
A CRISIS OF CARING: A CATHOLIC CRITIQUE OF AMERICAN WELFARE REFORM.
SOCIAL WELFARE, HUMAN DIGNITY, AND THE PUZZLE OF WHAT WE OWE EACH OTHER.
THE LIMITS OF INTERNATIONAL LAW IN PROTECTING DIGNITY.
WHAT CAN WE LEARN ABOUT HUMAN DIGNITY FROM INTERNATIONAL LAW.
TODAY'S SENATE CONFIRMATION BATTLES AND THE ROLE OF THE FEDERAL JUDICIARY.
OUR BROKEN JUDICIAL CONFIRMATION PROCESS AND THE NEED FOR FILIBUSTER REFORM.
The Utopian Eugenics of Our Time.
Conquering Mind and the End of Humanity: Prospects for a Robotic Future.
What's at the Bottom of the Slippery Slope: A Post-Human Future?
Responsibility and Biotechnology.
Deciding on War against Iraq.
Crisis Leadership: The Symbolic Transformation of the Bush Presidency.
The Bush Staff and Cabinet System.
George W. Bush and Congress: The Electoral Connection.
The Electoral College and the Development of American Democracy.
Presidential Nominating Conventions in a Democracy.
Lebanon's Hizbullah.
Governing International Rivers of the Middle East.
Rethinking the East Asian Balance of Power.
Extend Deterrence in the Taiwan Strait.
'One Rogue State Crisis at a Time!'
American Foreign Policy and U.S. Relations with Russia and China after 11 September.
Civil-Military Relations and Nuclearization of India and Pakistan.
Post-Apartheid South Africa: Transformation and Reconciliation.
Managing Internationalized Ethnic Conflict.
New quinolone/steroid combination for topical treatment of acute otitis: Early- and late-phase study results.
Value and safety of steroids in treating ear disease.
Aminoglycoside-containing eardrops: Avoiding ototoxicity and choosing safer alternatives.
Update on methods of assessing microbiologic success or failure in patients with otic disease.
Basics of biofilm in clinical otolaryngology.
Strategies for managing granulation tissue.
Prescribing guidelines for ENT medications during pregnancy.
Experience with the malleable ear dressing, a versatile silicone-lined bandage for the auricle.
Efficacy and tolerability of telithromycin for 5 or 10 days vs amoxicillin/clavulanic acid for 10 days in acute maxillary sinusitis.
The effect of tropical fluticasone on nasal nitric oxide levels in a patient with allergic rhinitis.
The effects of autologous platelet gel on wound healing.
Concha bullosa of an inferior turbinate.
Arteriovenous malformation of the maxillary sinus and mandible: A case report.
Giant-cell reparative granuloma of the temporal bone: A case report and review of the literature.
Mandibular ameloblastoma and maxillary adenoid cystic carcinoma: Case report.
An unusual case of external ear inflammation caused by sarcoidosis.
Hydrodissection for complete removal of a ranula.
Cervical emphysema secondary to pneumomediastinum as a complication of childbirth.
Glandular tularemia in a Native American child.
Hyperhomocysteinemia and left internal jugular vein thrombosis with M&eactute;nière's symptom complex.
Recurrent malignant schwannoma of the parapharyngeal space in neurofibromatosis type 1.
Expression of EphB4 in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Malacoplakia manifesting as a chronic inflammatory mass at the site of a nonhealing surgical wound.
Improved immunotherapy with a rapid allergen vaccination schedule: A study of 137 patients.
Phylogeny and embryology of the facial nerve and related structures. Part II: Embryology.
Assessment of intravenous lidocaine for the treatment of subjective tinnitus.
Esophageal perforation and neck abscess from ingested foreign bodies: Treatment and outcomes.
Bacteriological findings in patients with chronic sinusitis.
The prevalence of major psychiatric pathologies in patients with voice disorders.
Pressure-specifying sensory device: Quantitative sensory measurement in the oral cavity and oropharnyx of normal adults.
Pigmented villonodular synovitis of the temporomandibular joint: A report of two cases.
Oncocytic carcinoma of the parotid gland: Report of a new case.
Phylogeny and embryology of the facial nerve and related structures. Part I: Phylogeny.
Tongue viability after bilateral lingual artery ligation and surgery for recurrent tongue-base cancer.
A Gastroenteritis Outbreak Due to Norovirus Associated with a Colorado Hotel.
Minimizing Pathogenic Bacteria, Including Spores, in Indoor Air.
Messages in the Dust: Lessons Learned, Post-9/11, for Environmental Health. (cover story)
Environmental-Temperature Injury in a Canadian Metropolis.
Beyond General Fund: Environmental Health Revenues in a Down Economy.
Food Safety and Fees in Larimer County, Colorado: Impasse.
The ADA and The Food Code: Collision?
Efficacy and Durability of Bacillus anthracis Bacteriophages Used Against Spores.
Defining and Managing Biohazardous Waste in U.S. Research-Oriented Universities; A Survey of Environmental Health and Safety Professionals.
The Art of Presenting and Listening to Bad News.
Helping the Auto Repair Industry Manage Hazardous Wastes: An Education Project in King County, Washington.
Decontamination of Bacillus thuringiensis Spores on Selected Surfaces by Chlorine Dioxide Gas.
Practicing Environmental Health in a Down Economy: "Put on Your Superman Cape". (cover story)
Duty-to-Inform, Discrimination, and Septic-System Issues.
Evaluating Trihalomethane Content in Drinking Water on the Basis of Common Monitoring Parameters: Regression Models. (cover story)
Aerobic Residential Onsite Sewage Systems: An Evaluation of Treated--Effluent Quality.
NEHA's 2003 Annual Educational Conference and Exhibition--Reno, Nevada.
Housing, Inspection, and Statue-of-Limitations Issues.
A Comparison of Food Safety Knowledge Among Restaurant Managers, by Source of Training and Experience, in Oklahoma County, Oklahoma.
A Comparison of wellhead Protection Area Delineation Methods for Public Drinking Water Systems in Whatcom County, Washington.
A Cluster of Cases of Abdominal Pain Possibly Associated with High Copper Levels in a Private Water Supply.
Immunity from Liability---When Does It Apply?
Is Indoor Mold Contamination a Threat to Health? Part Two.
Does Attribution Theory Explain Physicians' Nonacceptance of Clinical Practice Guidelines?
A Fragmented Patient Safety Concept: The Structure and Culture of Safety Management in Healthcare.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Proposal to Pay for Performance.
African American Participation in Clinical Trials: Recruitment Difficulties and Potential Remedies.
Preventing Errors in Healthcare: A Call for Action.
Diversity Management: An Imperative for Healthcare Organizations.
The Role of Value in Provider-Patient-Payer Relationships.
Privacy--Private Lives, Public Lives.
Corporate Culture: The Missing Piece of the Healthcare Puzzle.
Achieving Strategic Consensus in the Hospital Setting: A Middle Management Perspective.
Wellness Programs in the Context of Strategic Human Resource Management.
Use of Robotics in Health Procedures-- Are We Ready for It?
Sudden unexplained death: evaluation of those left behind.
Efficacy of a short course of parent-initiated oral prednisolone for viral wheeze in children aged 1--5 years: randomised controlled trial.
Predictive ability of DNA microarrays for cancer outcomes and correlates: an empirical assessment.
Rotavirus antigenaemia and viraemia: a common event?
Cardiological assessment of first-degree relatives in sudden arrhythmic death syndrome.
Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-Osler-Weber disease).
Accounting for the health-care bill.
Short-term risk of disease progression in HIV-1-infected children receiving no antiretroviral therapy or zidovudine monotherapy: a meta-analysis.
Myocardial-tissue-specific phenotype of maternal microchimerism in neonatal lupus congenital heart block.
Anaesthesia: the patient's point of view.
Azoospermia in patients heterozygous for a mutation in SYCP3.
Food-aid cereals to reduce neurolathyrism related to grass-pea preparations during famine.
Hepatorenal syndrome.
Perioperative management and monitoring in anaesthesia.
A serostatus-based approach to HIV/AIDS prevention and care in Africa.
Nevirapine to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1 among women of unknown serostatus.
Effects of different blood-pressure-lowering regimens on major cardiovascular events: results of prospectively-designed overviews of randomised trials.
Herpes simplex virus in the respiratory tract of critical care patients: a prospective study.
Familial haemolytic uraemic syndrome and an MCP mutation.
Developing Continuing Education for Contact Hour Approval Through NAON.
Forearm and Humeral Fractures.
Workplace Violence.
Implementing a Total Joint Registry Using Personal Digital Assistants.
The American Society of Pain Management Nurses Role-Delineation Study.
Patient-Controlled Analgesia for the Pediatric Patient.
Strains and Sprains.
Alternative Therapies for Arthritis Treatment.
Stimulators of Bone Healing.
An Investigation of Patient Satisfaction Following Discharge After Total Hip Replacement Surgery.
How to Start a Nurse-Managed Foot Care Clinic.
Research Update.
Caring Doesn't End.
naon News.
The Female Athlete Triad.
Patients With Eating Disorders.
Changing Career Paths.
Alternative Therapies for Arthritis Treatment.
Traumatic Shoulder Instability.
Effects of T'ai Chi Exercise on Fibromyalgia Symptoms and Health-Related Quality of Life.
Tired Blood.
Declining Credibility for the AP Program.
The Wallow Style of Leadership.
How Ethics Was Specialized Away.
Who Best to Tame Grade Inflation?
Meaningless Grades and a New Dishonesty.
Viewing the MLA from a Community College.
PC and the Fast-Food Model for Teaching.
Books, Articles, and Items of Academic Interest.
The Unhappy Difference Diversity Makes.
The KC Johnson Case: A Question of Collegiality.
A Guide for Hard Times in Academia.
Political Correctness as an Academic Discipline.
Compelling Diversity Through Discrimination.
California Redefines Academic Freedom.
Redressing Cross-Dressed Shakespeare.
Books, Articles, and Items of Academic Interest.
The Writing Class.
How Kipling Taught Me to Write.
An Army of One.
Lost Causes and Gallantry.
My Father's Ship.
Squaring the Circle.
Knowledge on Fire.
Incognito Street.
The Case of Julius Goebel.
INTRODUCTION.
Orthodoxy or Decorum? Missionary Discourse, Religious Representations, and Historical Knowledge.
Friends to Your Souls: Jonathan Edwards' Indian Pastorate and the Doctrine of Original Sin.
Is It Worse to Follow Mahomet than the Devil? Early American Uses of Islam.
The New Divinity and the Origins of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions.
Cameras 'never lie': The Role of Photography in Telling the Story of American Evangelical Missions.
Pearl S. Buck and the Waning of the Missionary Impulse.
The Works of John Wesley: Volume 24, Journals and Diaries VII (1787-1791) (Book).
The Jews of Britain, 1656 to 2000 (Book).
The Jesus Road: Kiowas, Christianity, and Indian Hymns (Book).
The Lost Soul of American Protestantism (Book).
Narrative, Religion and Science: Fundamentalism versus Irony 1700-1999 (Book).
Religious Poverty, Mendicancy, and Reform in the Late Middle Ages.
Implementation Intentions Do Not Enhance All Types of Goals: The Moderating Role of Goal Difficulty.
Daily Hassles and Distress among College Students in Relation to Immigrant and Minority Status.
Accounting for Consistency and Change in Responses to Influence Attempts: An Examination of Preference for Consistency.
The Effects of Learned Helplessness on the Processing of a Persuasive Message.
Validating a "Spurning Scale" for Nurses in Hong Kong.
Trait Vulnerability and Coping Strategies in the Transition to Motherhood.
Gender Differences in Perceptions of Normal Body Weights.
Family Functioning and Eating Attitudes and Behaviors in At-Risk Early Adolescent Girls: The Mediating Role of Intra-Personal Competencies.
MMPI-2 and MCMI-III Scores among Dutch Inpatient Substance Abusers: Assessing Correspondence and Cross-Cultural Equivalence.
Personality and Religion: Applying Cattell's Model among Secondary School Pupils.
Factors Related to Reductions in Alcohol Consumption among College Students: The Role of Religious Involvement.
Absence of Parallel Forms for the Traditional Individual Intelligence Tests.
Accountability and Cooperation in Social Dilemmas: The Influence of Others' Reputational Concerns.
Reactions to Gay Men: Contact and Overcorrection in an Employee Selection Simulation.
Alexithymia, Verbal Intellectual Deficit, and Neurological Dysfunction in Relation to Risk-Taking Behavior.
Human Rights Sex Trafficking and Prostitution.
the defining moment.
violence among the palestinians.
Alas, Babylon! How the Bush Administration Allowed the Sack of Iraq's Antiquities. (cover story)
Lessons from the U.S. War on Iraq. (cover story)
HOW SHOULD WE "SUPPORT" OUR TROOPS? (cover story)
RELIGION AND THE QUEST FOR A SUSTAINABLE WORLD. (cover story)
ethics: time to revisit the basics.
Atheists in Foxholes, Christians in Uniforms.
partners as parents: challenges faced by gays denied marriage.
Behind Bush's Drive to War.
Rescuing a Planet Under Stress.
MEDICAL EDUCATION'S DIRTIEST SECRET.
Improve everything.
women's equality under attack. (cover story)
Merchants of Immortality: Chasing the Dream of Human Life Extension (Book).
Facing the Failures of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty Regime.
strategic violations: the outsourcing of human rights abuses.
the need for full recognition of same-sex marriage.
the common currents of imperialism.
Contributions of Thinking Styles to Critical Thinking Dispositions.
Sources of Annoyance in Close Relationships: Sex-Related Differences in Annoyance With Partner Behaviors.
Communicator Image and Myers-Briggs Type Indicator Extroversion-Introversion.
Psychometric Measures of Boredom: A Review of the Literature.
Individual- and Perceived Contextual-Level Antecendents of Individual Technical Information Inquiry in Organizations.
Recognizing Specialized Terminology Presented Through Different Modes.
Mood Alterations in Mindful Versus Aerobic Exercise Modes.
Procrastination at Work and Time Management Training.
Personality as a Predictor of the Value of Voice.
Sociotropy and Autonomy: The Nature of Vulnerability.
DIVINE GRACE AND HUMAN NATURE AS SOURCES FOR THE UNIVERSAL MAGISTERIUM OF BISHOPS.
THE MYSTERY OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE.
CHRISTIAN DOCTRINES, ETHICAL ISSUES, AND HUMAN GENETICS.
RETHINKING MORALITY'S RELATIONSHIP TO SALVATION: JOSEF FUCHS, S.J., ON MORAL GOODNESS.
AUGUSTINE'S DE TRINITATE AND LONERGAN'S REALMS OF MEANING.
GUADALUPE AT CALVARY: PATRISTIC THEOLOGY IN MIGUEL SÉNCHEZ'S IMAGEN DE LA VIRGEN MARÍA (1648).
THE CONVERGENCE OF FORGIVENESS AND JUSTICE: LESSONS FROM EL SALVADOR.
SACRAMENTAL PRESENCE IN A POSTMODERN CONTEXT/CONTEMPORARY SACRAMENTAL CONTOURS OF A GOD INCARNATE/THE PRESENCE OF TRANSCENDENCE (Book).
BOOKS RECEIVED.
RECEPTION OF VATICAN II IN THE UNITED STATES.
Safekeeping Fungi That Protect Plants Against Pets.
Nutrition & Eye Health.
Liquid Oxygen Saves Channel Catfish During Harvest.
Designing the Best Possible Conservation Buffers. (cover story)
Helping Plants Defend Themselves.
Helping States Slow Sediment Movement.
Nutrition's Role in Feeding Children's Brains.
We Don't Cotton to Boll Weevil 'Round Here Anymore.
ARS Is Banking on Germplasm. (cover story)
Radio Frequency Puts the Heat on Plant Pests.
Hot on the Trail of Fire Ants.
Testing Two Corn Rootworm Controls.
Superb New Potatoes Offered by Breeders.
Driving Nutrition Research to the Consumer.
Stopping the Swarm. (cover story)
Spud Hub Tests Potatoes' Fitness for Market.
Improving Trout Through Genetics Research.
THE ANCIENT ARTS OF BONSAI AND PENJING.
Crop Bounty Well Protected.
New Cuisine Wins Rave Reviews From Honey Bees.
Keeping Catfish on Consumers' Menus.
Biodiversity Rebounds After Wildfire.
DNA Markers. . . With a Twist for Improved Bean Breeding.
ARS: 50 Years of Research for the Growing World.
Project Aims to Clean House on Fifth Flies.
From Idea to Supermarket. (cover story)
Flowering Alfalfa Breaks Barriers.
Farming Without Harming.
RAISING CANE ARS RESEARCH BENEFITS SUGARCANE GROWERS AND PROCESSORS.
Brewing Up the Latest Tea Research. (cover story)
Military Community Integration and Its Effect on Well-Being and Retention.
Contextual Effects of Military Presence on Women's Earnings.
Racial Differences in the Impact of Military Service on the Socioeconomic Status of Women Veterans.
Civil-Military Relations in Post-Sandinista Nicaragua.
The Intellectual and Modern Focus in Israeli Military Thinking as Reflected in Ma'arachot Articles, 1948--2000.
Cohesion and the Culture of Hypermasculinity in U.S. Army Units.
Diversifying the Uniform? The Participation of Minority Ethnic Personnel in the British Armed Services.
Homeless Veterans of the All-Volunteer Force: A Social Selection Perspective.
Welfare and Warfare: American Organized Labor Approaches the Military-Industrial Complex, 1949--1964.
The Pragmatic Dimension of the Palestinian Hamas: A Network Perspective.
Military Rule, State Autonomy, and Privatization in the Southern Cone.
LOOKING AT LIFE THROUGH (AND IN) A CELL.
NEW CLASSIC ABOUT PLANT RESINS.
Multiscale Experiments in Coastal Ecology: Improving Realism and Advancing Theory.
Ecosystem Responses to Global Climate Change: Moving Beyond Color Mapping.
Bioethics: Are Our Priorities Right?
Conservation Planning for US National Forests: Conducting Comprehensive Biodiversity Assessments.
Disciplinary Research Strategies for Assessment of Learning.
Harmful Algal Blooms: Biosensors Provide New Ways of Detecting and Monitoring Growing Threat in Coastal Waters.
MICROBIAL MUDDLES.
Bioethics in a Changing World: Report from AIBS's 54th Annual Meeting.
Protected Area Assessments in Perspective.
Taxonomic Chauvinism and the Methodologically Challenged.
On Science and Literature: A Lesson from the Bernard-Zola Case.
Energy Efficiency and the New Green Marketing.
MAKING THE GLOBAL LOCAL. (cover story)
Innovative Natural Resource Management.
What's Price Got to Do with It? (cover story)
African Americans and the Environment.
Indicators of Progress.
PROVIDING 'BETTER' DATA.
Meeting the Sustainable Development Challenge.
Neither TEMPLES Nor TOMBS A GLOBAL ANALYSIS OF LARGE DAMS. (cover story)
AGROECOLOGY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.
A Lighter Tread? (cover story)
DIVERGENT PATHS.
A GLOBAL INDUSTRY WITH LOCAL IMPACTS. (cover story)
NITROGEN POLLUTION: Sources and Consequences in the U.S. Northeast.
WILL THE WORLD RUN DRY?: GLOBAL WATER AND FOOD SECURITY. (cover story)
The Arctic at Risk: Arctic Pollution 2002.
Information Transfer among Internet Firms: The Case of Hacker Attacks.
Discussion of Information Transfer among Internet Firms: The Case of Hacker Attacks.
Extending the Accounting Brand to Privacy Services.
Discussion of Extending the Accounting Brand to Privacy Services.
The Posh Hairdo Salon Case.
Professional Services, IBM, and the Holocaust.
St. Patrick Company: Using Role Play to Examine Internal Control and Fraud Detection Concepts.
Shooting the Past: An Instructional Case for Knowledge Management.
Toward a Biometric Security Layer in Accounting Systems.
Impact of Information Technology on Post-Earnings Announcement Drift.
An Experimental Examination of Information Technology and Compensation Structure Complementarities in an Expert System Context.
An Object-Oriented Model for Ex Ante Accounting Information.
The Effects of Exclusive User Choice of Decision Aid Features on Decision Making.
new PRODUCTS.
MIXING IT UP.
STARING DOWN THE DIVIDE.
JETS FANS.
SERVED STRAIGHT UP.
TRANSPORTATION REVOLUTION.
THE GOLDEN AGE OF FLIGHT.
THE FIRST HUNDRED ARE THE HARDEST.
Back to motor school.
How does your fluid flow?
Harnessing the void.
COAL CELL.
new products.
Trial by Flyer.
PROP-WRIGHTS.
The 2002-2003 ASME Fellows...
A touching sensation.
the next century of air power.
Look, Ma, No Pilot!.
THE CONQUEST OF FRICTION.
DIGGING DEEPER IN NEW YORK.
new PRODUCTS.
new products.
NeW ReTINaS For OLD. (cover story)
A little KNOWLEDGE.
BIRTH of a NEW PRODUCT.
BUG OFF.
the resource FILE.
new PRODUCTS.
not a drop to drink. (cover story)
Remember the adding machine.
MAKING A MESH OF THINGS.
FINITE ELEMENTS, ROMAN-STYLE.
CONTAINING explosions.
THEY aren't who you think. (cover story)
What Is a "Planet".
Building a School Observatory.
Earth, Wind, and Fire.
THE BIRTH OF WAR. (cover story)
The Chocolate Tree.
Summer Flings.
AT THE MUSEUM.
The Rise and Fall of Planet X.
Imposter in the Nest.
The Owl That Hunts by Light.
Patterns in Nature.
Close Encounters.
Dark and Darker.
Desert Dreams.
The Lizard Kings. (cover story)
Trashed.
Fight of the Bumblebee.
Stand and Deliver.
Let There Be Light.
Something to Howl About.
Promised Land.
Sunbathing Seals of Antarctica.
Crop Circles.
In the Beginning.
The Pleasure (and Pain) of "Maybe".
Bolts from Beyond. (cover story)
Moonstruck.
The Varieties of Mathematical Experience.
The Quest for the Golden Lens.
The Fundamental Physical Constants.
Nobel Prize in Physics Honors Theoretical Work on Superconductivity and Superfluidity.
Stern and Gerlach: How a Bad Cigar Helped Reorient Atomic Physics.
The Danish Observer, the German Mathematician, and the Center of the Universe.
Neutron Diffraction Overcomes Flux Limits to Resolve a Large Protein Structure.
Disappointing Collider Performance and Tight Budgets Confront Fermilab With Tough Decisions.
Nuclear Bunker Busters, Mini-Nukes, and the US Nuclear Stockpile. (cover story)
The Growth of Astrophysical Understanding.
The Business of Academic Physics.
New Books.
New Products.
Ultracold Fermionic Atoms Team up as Molecules: Can They Form Cooper Pairs as Well?
Nanoparticles Locate and Flag the Blood Vessels That Nourish Tumors.
Applying Physics and the Law.
Academies Seek to Promote Scientific Excellence in Developing Countries.
Benjamin Franklin, Civic Scientist.
What Have We Learned From the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider?
The Contentious Role of a National Observatory.
New Books.
New Products.
Four Experiments Give Evidence of an Exotic Baryon With Five Quarks.
Gamma-Ray Images Uncover Solar Flare Surprises.
HERA Scientists Fight to Extend Strong Interaction Studies.
Astronomers Lobby for New Lease on Hubble's Life.
Paradigms in Physics: Restructuring the Upper Level.
New Books.
Hilda Gertrude Kingslake/Rudolf Kingslake.
The Rewards of Patience.
Adventures in Ethiopia.
News.
Preparing Images for Output.
Tunisian Safari.
Life As Seen Through a Very Small Portal.
International Conference of the Photographic Society of America.
have you wondered...what the Board's photographic interests are?
Pindaya Land of Harmony, Spirit of Grace.
Sequential Aerial Stereo Photography.
Shooting Digital.
Creative Photography.
solarization more fun in the darkroom.
THE PHOTOGRAPHIC SOCIETY OF AMERICA 2001-2002 Audit Report.
Paper Negatives REVISITED.
Using KODALITH to Create Artistic Montage Derivations.
AFRICA RHINO CONSERVATION.
Photography as Art; Proclaim It!
ELECTRONIC IMAGING Not For Fantasy Only.
News.
Decreasing Hauls, Yet Growing Beauty.
JAMBO! East Africa: Call of the Wild.
News.
Aesthetical Values of Photography and Arnheim's Psychology of Art.
Tours in Texas!
Wildlife Photography and Audio/Visual Presentations.
A Digital Novice.
News.
WHO'S WHO in Photography 2002.
Bring a Camera to Experience the 19th Century on Mackinac Island.
Photography and the Search for Meaning.
News.
Digital Magic.
Beginnings and Ends: Temperate Rainforests of the Pacific Northwest.
The Art of Photographing the Dance.
News.
Doing it…Like the Pros.
2003 PSA Youth Showcase.
KENYA~the Rock and Tree Hyrax or Dassie.
The Unforgettable Ayon Oros.
News.
news notes.
COMPUTER NEWS.
news notes.
COMPUTER NEWS.
News notes.
COMPUTER NEWS.
News notes.
Rainfall Research.
The Art of Sorting.
COMPUTER NEWS.
CLASSROOM AIDS.
Computer-Aided Design Tools.
Organization, Practices and Technology Paying Off for Tampa.
Chlorine Residual Boosting in Distribution Water.
Bringing Home the Bacon.
Municipalities Tap into Benefits of EDR Water Treatment.
Prefabricated Pumping Systems.
Anchors Aweigh: New Methods for Installing Synthetic Underwater Pipelines: Part 2.
A Simple Tool to Evaluate the True Cost of Growth.
Fieldbus Communications.
Anchors Aweigh.
150 Years of WEM.
Valve Actuators.
TECHNOLOGY FOCUS.
Dried Up. (cover story)
Fiber-Reinforced Polymer Technology.
Replacing the London Water Supply SCADA System.
Assessing Leakage in Water Supply Networks Using Flowmeters.
In the Field: Stormwater Treatment at a New Continental Airport Terminal.
Enhanced Coagulation Treatment Process.
Understanding Water Service Entries.
Chlorine Residual Boosting in Distribution Water: Problems with Chlorine Application and Disinfection Byproducts -- Part 2.
SOME THOUGHTS ON THE INTRODUCTORY COURSE IN PHYSICS.
USING ALUMNI AND STUDENT DATABASES FOR PROGRAMEVALUATION AND PLANNING.
ENGINEERING STUDENTS' PERCEPTIONS OF ACADEMICACTIVITIES AND SUPPORT SERVICES: FACTORS THATINFLUENCE THEIR ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE.
SELF EFFICACY, ALCOHOL EXPECTANCY AND PROBLEM-SOLVINGAPPRAISAL AS PREDICTORS OF ALCOHOL USE IN COLLEGE STUDENTS.
WHAT ASPECTS OF THEIR MEMORIES DO COLLEGE STUDENTS MOSTWANT TO IMPROVE?
UNDERGRADUATE STUDENT LEISURE INTERESTS OVER THREE DECADES.
DIFFERENCES IN MEANING IN LIFE IN STUDENTS: THE EFFECT OFNONTRADITIONAL STATUS AND REGION OF COUNTRY.
ATTITUDES OF COLLEGE STUDENTS TOWARD CONTRACEPTIVES: ACONSIDERATION OF GENDER DIFFERENCES.
CHANGES IN SHORT-TERM ATTITUDES TOWARD PHYSICAL ACTIVITYAND EXERCISE OF UNIVERSITY PERSONAL WELLNESS STUDENTS.
EMPLOYERS' PREFERENCES FOR BACHELORS' AND MASTERS'LEVEL REHABILITATION GRADUATES.
EXAMINING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WORRY AND TRAIT ANXIETY.
CHALLENGE IN CHILDREN'S LITERATURE.
TEST CHEATING IN A RURAL COLLEGE: STUDYING THEIMPORTANCE OF INDIVIDUAL AND SITUATIONAL FACTORS.
Epistemic Beliefs of Teachers in Technology-RichCommunity College Technical Education Programs.
Editor's Choice: An Assessment of the Association ofCalifornia Community College Administrators Mentor Program.
UCLA Community College Review: Performance Indicatorsand Performance-Based Funding in Community Colleges.
STORYTELLING: ENHANCING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION IN YOUNG CHILDREN.
INTERNET REVIEW: EDUCATOR CONCERNS REGARDING CYBERSPACE CURRICULA.
SALVADOR DA BAHIA: A "MODERN" IMPERIAL ROME.
ADULT'S PERCEPTION OF FIELD TRIPS TAKEN WITHIN GRADES K-12: EIGHT CASE STUDIES IN THE NEW YORK METROPOLITAN AREA.
THE "NUTS AND DOLTS" OF TEACHER IMAGES IN CHILDREN'S PICTURE STORYBOOKS: A CONTENT ANALYSIS.
PARENTS AS FIRST TEACHER.
ATTITUDES TOWARD INCLUSION: KNOWLEDGE VS. EXPERIENCE.
ELEMENTARY TEACHERS' BELIEFS AND KNOWLEDGE ABOUT GRADE RETENTION: HOW DO WE KNOW WHAT THEY KNOW?
LEARNING THE SKILL THEME APPROACH: SALIENT AND PROBLEMATIC ASPECTS OF PEDAGOGICAL CONTENT KNOWLEDGE.
THE ABSENCE OF DIVERSITY IN THE ACADEMY: FACULTY OF COLOR IN EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION PROGRAMS.
TOWARD AN UNDERSTANDING OF "GENETIC SOCIOLOGY" AND ITS RELATIONSHIPS TO MEDICAL SOCIOLOGY AND MEDICAL GENETICS IN THE EDUCATIONAL ENTERPRISE.
SUPPORTIVE PRACTICES IN TEACHER EDUCATION: FINDING OUT WHAT PRESERVICE TEACHERS KNOW ABOUT TEACHING, LEARNING, AND COMMUNITY, THROUGH PURPOSEFUL AND CREATIVE ASSESSMENT.
THE INFLUENCE OF MUSIC ON CORE LEARNING.
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL TEACHERS' PERCEPTIONS AND ATTITUDES TO THE EDUCATIONAL STRUCTURE OF TRACKING.
TEACHERS' PERCEPTIONS OF SCHOOL COUNSELOR EFFECTIVENESS: COLLABORATING FOR STUDENT SUCCESS.
A COMPARATIVE ASSESSMENT OF CONSTRUCTIVIST AND TRADITIONALIST APPROACHES TO ESTABLISHING MATHEMATICAL CONNECTIONS IN LEARNING MULTIPLICATION.
PUTTING AN END TO THE BATTLE OVER HOMEWORK.
GENDER DISPARITY IN SCIENCE EDUCATION: THE CAUSES, CONSEQUENCES, AND SOLUTIONS.
SOME THOUGHTS ABOUT THE FUTURE OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING IN NIGERIA.
MNEMONIC STRATEGIES: CREATING SCHEMATA FOR LEARNING ENHANCEMENT.
MANIFESTATIONS OF LEARNING DISABILITIES IN UNIVERSITY STUDENTS: IMPLICATIONS FOR COPING AND ADJUSTMENT.
A Preliminary Analysis of African American College Students' Perceptions of Racial Preferences and Affirmative Action in Making Admissions Decisions at a Predominantly White University.
Cooperative Learning on Academic Achievement in Elementary African American Males.
The Symbolic World of the Bilingual Child: Digressions on Language Acquisition, Culture and the Process of Thinking.
Implementing Strategies to Assist Test-Anxious Students.
Ability and Critical Thinking as Predictors of Change in Students' Psychological Misconceptions.
The Relationship Between Testing Condition and Student Test Scores.
The Effects of Guided Notes on Undergraduate Students' Recording of Lecture Content.
Gesell's Infant Growth Orientation: A Composite.
Public Speaking in a Democracy.
Bullying and Children with Disabilities.
Some Thoughts About Deception.
Preparing Tomorrow's Teachers to Use Technology: Attitudinal Impacts of Technology-supported Field Experience On Pre-service Teacher Candidates.
PBL Approach in Web-Based Instruction.
The Impact of Environmental Print Instruction on Early Reading Ability.
The Table of Specifications: Insuring Accountability in Teacher Made Tests.
The Effect of Participation in the Neighborhood Academic Program on the Autophotographic Self-Concepts of Inner-City Adolescents.
The Profession of Psychology Scale: Sophisticated and Naïve Students' Responses.
A Comparison of American and Taiwanese Students: Their Math Perception.
Behavior Management Skills as Predictors of Retention Among South Texas Special Educators.
Cited Author Searching: Implications For Instruction in Forensic Psychology.
Applying Technology to Online Counseling: Suggestions for the Beginning E-Therapist.
The Extent to which Psychology Students Read Textbooks: A Multiple Class Analysis of Reading across the Psychology Curriculum.
Definitions, Benefits, and Barriers of K-12 Educational Strategic Planning.
Recent Trends in the Social Studies.
Educator Effectiveness in Identifying Symptoms of Adolescents at Risk for Suicide.
An Analysis of Administrator Attitudes Toward Tasks in School Administration.
Technology Use of Hispanic Bilingual Teachers: A Function of their Beliefs, Attitudes and Perceptions on Peer Technology Use in the Classroom.
Recollections of a Life of Service to Our Field: Dr. John J. Feldhusen.
Is Consensus on a Definition in the Field Possible, Desirable, Necessary?
An Imperative, But, Alas, Improbable Consensus!
Multiple Intelligences of Chinese Gifted Students in Hong Kong: Perspectives from Students, Parents, Teachers, and Peers.
The Contribution of Emotional Intelligence to the Social and Academic Success of Gifted Adolescents as Measured by the Multifactor Emotional Intelligence Scale - Adolescent Version.
The Effectiveness of Curriculum Compacting in First Grade Classrooms.
Influence of Gender and Academic Ability in a Computer-Based Spanish Reading Task.
Sensitivity: A Double-Edged Sword for the Pre-Adolescent and Adolescent Gifted Child.
A Longitudinal Assessment of Gifted Students' Learning Using the Integrated Curriculum Model (ICM): Impacts and Perceptions of the William and Mary Language Arts and Science Curriculum.
Talents and Type IIIs: The Effects of the Talents Unlimited Model on Creative Productivity in Gifted Youngsters.
Gifted Students With Spatial Strengths and Sequential Weaknesses: An Overlooked and Underidentified Population.
Beyond Cultureblindness: A Model of Culture With Implications for Gifted Education.
Gifted Students' Self-Perceptions of Ability in Specific Subject Domains: Factor Structure and Relationship With Above-Level Test Scores.
Understanding Resilience in Diverse, Talented Students in an Urban High School.
Counseling At-Risk Afro-American Youth: An Examinationof Contemporary Issues and Effective School-Based Strategies.
Applying the ASCA National Model to Elementary SchoolStudents Who Are Homeless: A Case Study.
The Challenge to Change from Guidance Counseling toProfessional School Counseling: A Historical Proposition.
Teacher Perceptions and Expectations of School CounselorContributions: Implications for Program Planning and Training.
Career Development for Adolescents and Young Adultswith Mental Retardation.
Impact of a Career Intervention on At-Risk Middle SchoolStudents' Career Maturity Levels, Academic Achievement, andSelf-Esteem.
Counseling Needs of Academically Talented Students withLearning Disabilities.
Eating Disorder Intervention, Prevention, and Treatment:Recommendations for School Counselors.
Body Image Disorder in Adolescent Males: Strategies forSchool Counselors.
Comprehensive Guidance and Counseling Programs:The Evolution of Accountability.
Counseling the Linguistically and Culturally DiverseStudent: Meeting School Counselors' ProfessionalDevelopment Needs.
A Survey of Assessment and Evaluation Activitiesof School Counselors.
School Counselors' Perceptions of the Impact of High-StakesTesting.
School and Family Counselors Work Together to ReduceFighting at School.
Current Perspectives on School-Based Behavioral Interventions: Introduction to the Mini-Series.
Current Status and Future Directions of School-Based Behavioral Interventions.
Extrinsic Reinforcement in the Classroom: Bribery or Best Practice.
Troubleshooting Behavioral Interventions: A Systematic Process for Finding and Eliminating Problems.
A Demographic Survey of Learning Behaviors Among American Students.
An Exploration of the Relationship Between Ethnicity, Attention Problems, and Academic Achievement.
Preparing Teachers in Evidence-Based Practices for Young Children With Autism.
Guidelines for Student Threat Assessment: Field-Test Findings.
The Impact of a Structured Reading Curriculum and Repeated Reading on the Performance of Junior High Students With Emotional and Behavioral Disorders.
The Relationship Between Gender of Consultant and Social Power Perceptions Within School Consultation.
INTERGENERATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF PREJUDICE, SEX ROLE STERIOTYPING, AND INTOLERANCE.
EVALUATION OF AN EMPOWERMENT PROGRAM FOR EARLY ADOLESCENT GIRLS.
ADOLESCENTS' SELF-EFFICACY TO COMMUNICATE ABOUT SEX: ITS ROLE IN CONDOM ATTITUDES, COMMITMENT AND USE.
THE RELATION OF AGE, GENDER, ETHNICITY, AND RISK BEHAVIORS TO SELF-ESTEEM AMONG STUDENTS IN NONMAINSTREAM SCHOOLS.
OLDER ADOLESCENTS' POSITIVE ATTITUDES TOWARD YOUNGER ADOLESCENTS AS SEXUAL PARTNERS.
PSYCHOSOCIAL CORRELATES OF SUBSTANCE USE BEHAVIORS AMONG AFRICAN AMERICAN YOUTH.
BLACK, HISPANIC, AND WHITE AMERICAN MOTHERS OF ADOLESCENTS: CONSTRUCTION OF A NATIONAL STANDARD.
ACCEPTANCE OF AND ENGAGEMENT IN RISKY DRIVING BEHAVIORS BY TEENAGERS.
ADOLESCENT LONELINESS ASSESSMENT.
PATERNAL ABSENCE AND INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION: STRESSORS AND COMPENSATORS ASSOCIATED WITH THE MENTAL HEALTH OF MEXICAN TEENAGERS OF RURAL ORIGIN.
TAIWANESE ADOLESCENTS' PERCEPTIONS AND ATTITUDES REGARDING THE INTERNET: EXPLORING GENDER DIFFERENCES.
EXPERIENCES OF BEING HOMELESS OR AT RISK OF BEING HOMELESS AMONG CANADIAN YOUTHS.
ANGER AND AGGRESSION AMONG FILIPINO STUDENTS.
MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION: ISRAELI AND GERMAN ADOLESCENTS' KNOWLEDGE AND VIEWS REGARDING THE HOLOCAUST.
PERCEPTIONS OF PRESENT, IDEAL, AND FUTURE LIVES AMONG CHINESE ADOLESCENTS EXPERIENCING ECONOMIC DISADVANTAGE.
COPING ATTITUDES, SOURCES, AND PRACTICES AMONG BLACK AND LATINO COLLEGE STUDENTS.
ADOLESCENTS' PSYCHOLOGICAL HEALTH AND EXPERIENCES WITH UNWANTED SEXUAL BEHAVIOR AT SCHOOL.
Class and Cosmopolitan Striving: Mothers' Management of English Education in South Korea.
Mien Alter-Natives in Thai Modernity.
Women Work, Men Sponge, and Everyone Gossips: Macho Men and Stigmatized/ing Women in a Sex Tourist Town.
On Being Young.
A Note on Transnational Consanguinity, or, Kinship in the Age of Terrorism.
Gandhi or Gramsci? The Use of Authoritative Sources in Anthropology.
Technologies of Servitude: Governmentality and Indonesian Transnational Labor Migration.
Nothing to See Hear.
Tamilnet.com: Some Reflections on Popular Anthropology, Nationalism, and the Internet.
Egyptomania!
Seeds of Time.
Nouvelle-France.
Battles of Cerro Sechín.
City of Poseidon.
DOES GREECE NEED THE OLYMPICS.
The War Within the War.
Guns of Sandy Hook.
Elusive Libraries of Timbuktu.
Decoding the Megaliths.
Flashpoint Ayodhya.
Anasazi in the Backyard.
Banking on Stone Money.
Kingdom of the Sands.
Caring for the Dead.
Past, Present, Future PERCEPTIONS OF TIME THROUGH THE AGES.
Secrets in the Cinders.
Hollywood Holy Land.
Diving the Maya Underworld.
Hidden History of Ralston Heights.
Was there a Trojan War?
A Novel Legacy.
The Alchemist's Lab.
The Trouble with BLOOD.
Utah's Ancient Ones.
SPACE.
Colorado Coalfield Massacre.
Lost City.
Battles Over Battlefields.
Applying Science.
City in the Sky.
Rethinking the Picts.
Water World.
Native Voices.
GENDER DIFFERENCES IN THE REHOSPITALIZATION OF SUBSTANCE ABUSERS AMONG HOMELESS MILITARY VETERANS.
SENDING THE WRONG MESSAGE: DID MEDICAL MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION IN CALIFORNIA CHANGE ATTITUDES ABOUT AND USE OF MARIJUANA?
U.S. DRUG CONTROL POLICIES: FEDERAL SPENDING ON LAW ENFORCEMENT VERSUS TREATMENT IN PUBLIC HEALTH OUTCOMES.
CHARACTERISTICS AND HIV RISK BEHAVIORS AMONG INJECTION DRUG USERS IN ST. PETERSBURG, RUSSIA: A COMPARISON OF NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAM ATTENDERS AND NONATTENDERS.
CHARACTERISTICS AND PATTERNS OF USE AMONG REGULAR HEROIN SNIFFERS.
ROLLING BEYOND RAVES: ECSTASY USE OUTSIDE THE RAVE SETTING.
DRUG TREATMENT PROGRAMS AS SITES OF OPPORTUNITY FOR THE DELIVERY OF HEPATITIS C PREVENTION EDUCATION: CLIENT AND STAFF PERSPECTIVES.
DRUG TREATMENT NEEDS OF HISPANIC DRUG USERS IN LONG BEACH, CALIFORNIA.
CORRELATES OF SAFE SYRINGE ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL PRACTICES AMONG YOUNG IDUs: BROADENING OUR NOTION OF RISK.
RECIPROCITY AND EXPLOITATION: SOCIAL DYNAMICS IN PRIVATE DRUG USE SITES.
AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF THE SCHOOL ZONE ANTI-DRUG LAW IN THREE CITIES IN MASSACHUSETTS.
Graphic Stories: Representing the Status of Female Faculty.
Recent Feminist Art History: An American Sampler.
Why Is Buying a "Madras" Cotton Shirt a Political Act? A Feminist Commodity Chain Analysis.
WORDS ON THE ELECTION FROM OUR EDITORS, CONSULTANTS, AND AUTHORS.
preface.
More Than Just Words: Women's Poetry and Resistance at Cook County Jail.
All Ellas: Girls Locked Up.
Making Home/Making "Stranger": An Interview with Cheryl Dunye.
GARDENS AND DWELLING: PEOPLE IN VERNACULAR GARDENS.
ISTANBUL'S BOSTANS: A MILLENNIUM OF MARKET GARDENS.
TENDING CULTURAL LANDSCAPES AND FOOD CITIZENSHIP IN TORONTO'S COMMUNITY GARDENS.
AUSTRALIAN BACKYARD GARDENS AND THE JOURNEY OF MIGRATION.
HOME GARDENS IN AMAZONIAN PERU: DIVERSITY AND EXCHANGE OF PLANTING MATERIAL.
THE NINETEENTH-CENTURY EVOLUTION OF LOCAL-SCALE ROADS IN KENTUCKY'S BLUEGRASS.
IMPACTS OF TRANSPORTATION CHANGES ON THE WOODWORKING INDUSTRY OF MEXICO'S PURÉPECHA REGION.
FROM EXCLUSIONARY COVENANT TO ETHNIC HYPERDIVERSITY IN JACKSON HEIGHTS, QUEENS.
THE SUPREME COURT'S ROLE IN CHOCTAW AND CHICKASAW DISPOSSESSION.
SQUINTING BACK AT STRABO.
AUDUBON TERRACE, THE AMERICAN GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY, AND THE SENSE OF PLACE.
A CRY FOR HELP: KANSASFREELAND.COM.
My Memory, Myself: The Role of Culture in Memory and Self-Identity.
Time and a Chair: Teaching Design Theory.
Public Policies and Vulnerable Populations.
ReConceptualizing the Gay Teen.
Interpreting the Influence of Diverse Cultures on Fashion.
Sociocultural Challenges of Feeding Infants and Small Children.
Education for Cleaner Indoor Air.
Helping Older Individuals Age Successfully.
Serving Children of Low-Income Families.
Engineering Textiles to Protect Workers from Toxic Chemicals.
Cooking Up Fun!
Child Care Programs of Excellence.
Children and the Physical Environment.
Dissecting the Process of Reasoning.
Parent-Child Communication: A Told for Youth Health.
Effect of Team Size in Soccer on Moderate to VigorousPhysical Activity.
Investigation of Role Retreatism in the Teacher/Coach.
Coaches' Perceptions of Conference Code of Ethics.
Work experiences, occupational commitment, and intentto enter the sport management profession.
Coaching with Simplicity: Thoreau and Sport.
Reported and Actual Incidence of Asthma in Teenage Athletes: A Dangerous Discrepancy.
The Effect of a Constant Time Delay Procedure on Teachingan Adult with Severe Mental Retardation a Recreation Bowling Skill.
Physical Education Teachers' Perceptions of the Adequacyof University Coursework in Preparation for Teaching.
Preservice Teachers' Value Orientations Value Orientationsand their Compatibility with the National Curriculum forPhysical Education.
Undergraduate Physical Education Teacher Preparation:What Practitioners Tell Us.
Implementation of a Walking Program for Urban Youth DuringSchool Hours.
Effects of Brain Gym on Overhand Throwing in First GradeStudents: A Preliminary Investigation.
Comparisons of Selected Student and Teacher Variables inAll-Girls and Coeducational Physical Education Environments.
Violent, Delinquent, and Aggressive Behaviors of Rural High School Athletes and Non-Athletes.
Preservice Teachers' Reflections on their Home-School Clinical Teaching Experience: Evidence to Support An Alternative Field Experience for Teacher Educators.
The Effects of Two Instructional Models--Tactical and Skill Teaching--on Skill Development and Game Play, Knowledge, Self-Efficacy, and Student Perceptions in Volleyball.
Risk factors for the female athlete triad among female collegiate and noncollegiate athletes.
Motivational Traits of Elite Young Soccer Players.
We Train Teachers: Why Not Supervisors and Mentors?
Sexual Addiction, Sexual Compulsivity, Sexual Impulsivity, or What? Toward a Theoretical Model.
The Relationship Between Indicators of Sexual Compulsivity and High Risk Sexual Practices Among Men and Women Receiving Services From a Sexually Transmitted Infection Clinic.
Sexual Behavior and Responsiveness to Sexual Stimuli Following Laboratory-Induced Sexual Arousal.
The Role of Close Friends in African American Adolescents' Dating and Sexual Behavior.
Determinants of Sexual Arousal and the Accuracy of its Self-Estimation in Sexually Functional Males.
Gay and Bisexual Men's Age-Discrepant Childhood Sexual Experiences.
Condom Use Self-Efficacy Among U.S.- and Foreign-Born Latinos in Texas.
Past and New Victimization Among African American Female Drug Users Who Participated in an HIV Risk-Reduction Intervention.
HOW ENVIRONMENTALLY-FRIENDLY CANDIDATES FARED IN THE CONGRESSIONAL ELECTIONS OF 2002: A TIME OF GREEN ANXIETY?
MERCANTILE COMMUNITIES IN THE CEDED ISLANDS: THE ALEXANDER BARTLET & GEORGE CAMPBELL COMPANY.
THE UNITED STATES AND ISLAMIC RADICALS: CONFLICT UNENDING?
THE ROLE OF LOBBYING ON LEGISLATIVE ACTIVITY WHEN LAWMAKERS PLAN TO LEAVE OFFICE.
INTEGRATING TEACHING, LEARNING, AND COMMUNITY OUTREACH: WESTERN CAROLINA'S LOCAL GOVERNMENT YOUTH ASSEMBLY.
POLICY POINT-COUNTERPOINT: STATE LOTTERIES.
TALKING THE TALK: BILL CLINTON AND SCHOOL DESEGREGATION.
AMERICAN CIVIL SERVICE REFORM: USING FRANCE AS A MODEL TO DEVELOP ADMINISTRATIVE STATESMEN IN THE SENIOR EXECUTIVE SERVICE.
INFANTS' EMOTIONAL EXPRESSIONS IN RESPONSE TO SOCIAL AND NON-SOCIAL STIMULI.
THE BAHÁ'Í FAITH AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO ISLAM, CHRISTIANITY, AND JUDAISM: A BRIEF HISTORY.
POINT: THE CASE FOR PROFILING.
COUNTERPOINT: THE CASE AGAINST PROFILING.
The Development of Movement Imagery Vividness Through a Structured Intervention in Softball.
An Examination of the Maintenance of Preshot Routines in Basketball Free Throw Shooting.
Affect Responses to Acute Bouts of Aerobic Exercise: A Test of Opponent-Process Theory.
A Comparison of Modeling and Imagery on the Performance of a Motor Skill.
Using Sex and Gender Role Orientation to Predict Level of Sport Fandom.
Cultural Influence on Youth's Motivation of Participation in Physical Activity.
Sources of Disordered Eating Patterns Between Ballet Dancers and Non-dancers.
Effects of Motivational Music on Work Output and Affective Responses During Sub-maximal Cycling of a Standardized Perceived Intensity.
Gender Differences in Coping with Endurance Sport Stress: Are Men From Mars And Women From Venus?
Treatment Acceptability in NCAA Division I Football Athletes: Rehabilitation Intervention Strategies.
Social Cognitive Predictors of Creatine Use Versus Non-Use Among Male, Undergraduate, Recreational Resistance Trainers.
Job Satisfaction Among Mid-level Collegiate Campus Recreation Program Administrators.
The Effectiveness of a Brief Cognitive Intervention to Help Athletes Cope With Competition Loss.
The Relationship Between Self-Confidence, Mood State, And Anxiety Among Collegiate Tennis Players.
Development of the Student-Athlete Experiences Inventory.
Weight Pressures and Social Physique Anxiety Among Collegiate Synchronized Skaters.
Intra-Individual Variability in State Anxiety and Self-Confidence in Elite Golfers.
College Students' Implicit Theories of Ability in Sports: Race and Gender Differences.
Profile of Personnel Preparation Programs in Visual Impairments and Their Faculty: A Status Report.
Word Reading and Processing of the Identity and Order of Letters by Children with Low Vision and Sighted Children.
Teaching and Assessing the Appropriateness of Uncontracted Braille.
Is Social Isolation a Predictable Outcome of Inclusive Education?
The Effectiveness of Comprehensive Low Vision Services for Older Persons with Visual Impairments in New Zealand.
Characteristics of Children Evaluated at a Pediatric Low Vision Clinic: 1981-2003.
Development and Implementation of a Curriculum to Develop Social Competence for Students with Visual Impairments in Germany.
Resources for Adapting Low Vision Training Materials for the Adult with Low Literacy Skills.
Low Vision Rehabilitation of Retinitis Pigmentosa.
A Half Century Later: Where Are We? Where Do We Need to Go?
The History and Future of Low Vision Services in the United States.
Low Vision Rehabilitation: A Comparison of Traditional and Extended Teaching Programs.
Policy to Practice: Teachers' and Administrators' Views on Curricular Access by Students with Low Vision.
The Experience of Age-related Macular Degeneration.
Low Vision Driving with Bioptics: An Overview.
Equal Protection, the ADA, and Driving with Low Vision: A Legal Analysis.
Experience of Monocular Vision in Australia.
CRIMES OF THE DREAM WORLD: FRENCH TRIALS OF DIOLA WITCHES IN COLONIAL SENEGAL.
BEFORE "BAGA": SETTLEMENT CHRONOLOGIES OF THE COASTAL RIO NUNEZ REGION, EARLIEST TIMES TO &lt;sub&gt;c&lt;/sub&gt;.1000 CE.
DUELING BANDS AND GOOD GIRLS: GENDER, MUSIC, AND NATION IN LUANDA'S MUSSEQUES, 1961-1974.
GOVERNMENT QADIS AND CHILD MARRIAGE IN ADEN: ETHNOGRAPHY IN THE ADEN ARCHIVES.
RETHINKING THE HISTORY OF SETTLER AGRICULTURE IN NINETEENTH-CENTURY LIBERIA.
ASPECTS OF ELITE WOMEN'S ACTIVISM IN THE GOLD COAST, 1874-1890.
ROCKING THE BOAT IN SOUTH AFRICA? VOËLVRY MUSIC AND AFRIKAANS ANTI-APARTHEID SOCIAL PROTEST IN THE 1980s.
NJÀNGAAN: THE DAILY REGIME OF QUR'ÂNIC STUDENTS IN TWENTIETH-CENTURY SENEGAL.
Anticolonial Strategies for the Recovery and Maintenance of Indigenous Knowledge.
Changes in Childbirth Knowledge.
Bringing Traditional Teachings to Leadership.
White Evil: Peronist Argentina in the US Popular Imagination Since 1955.
Heritage Tourism: Where Public and History Don't Always Meet.
Apologies for Atrocities: Commemorating the 50th Anniversary of World War II's End in the United States and Japan.
Slavery and the Contest for National Heritage in the United States and the Netherlands.
History in New Worlds: Surveys and Results in the United States and Australia.
Capturing the Public Imagination: The Social and Professional Place of Public History.
Historians as Managers of the Nation's Cultural Heritage.
Exhibition as Dance: An Exercise in Creative Partnering.
The American Moving Image Diaspora: The archeology of US Moveis in International Archives.
The Kokopelli Conundrum: Lessons Learned from Teaching Native American Students.
Playing to Strength: Teaching Public History at the Turn of the 21st-Century.
The New Americanist Intervention into the Canon.
IBRAHIM AND EDWARD.
THE IDEA OF PALESTINE IN THE LIVES AND WORKS OF ABU-LUGHOD AND SAID.
EDWARD W. SAID (1935-2003).
OUR PHILOLOGICAL HOME IS THE EARTH.
INTRODUCTION.
THE ARAB HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2002: REVIEW AND REFORM.
THE 2003 ARAB HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT: A CRITICAL APPROACH.
SOME ASPECTS OF THE ARAB HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2003 AS READ BY A EUROPEAN SCHOLAR.
IRAQ AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: CULTURE, EDUCATION AND THE GLOBALIZATION OF HOPE.
REPRESENTATIONS OF JERUSALEM IN THE MODERN PALESTINIAN NOVEL.
INTERCESSORY WASTA AND VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT IN LEBANON.
JORDAN FIRST: JORDAN'S INTER-ARAB RELATIONS AND FOREIGN POLICY UNDER KING ABDULLAH II.
STRANGE FRUIT? SYRIAN IMMIGRANTS, EXTRALEGAL VIOLENCE AND RACIAL FORMATION IN THE JIM CROW SOUTH.
The Laws of Geoeconomic Gravity Fulfilled? China's Move toward Center Stage.
Implications of the People's Liberation Army's Technocratization for U.S. Power in East Asia.
The IMF, the U.S. War on Terrorism, and Pakistan.
An Interpretation of the Asian Financial Crisis: Innovation Systems and Economic Performance in a Period of Transformation.
Japan-Taiwan Relations: Between Affinity and Reality.
Ambivalent Allies: Recent South Korean Perceptions of the United States Forces Korea (USFK).
Like Rain Drops Rolling Down New Paint: Chinese Immigrants and the Problem of National Identity in the Work of Emily Carr.
From Special Relationship to Third Option: Canada, the U.S., and the Nixon Shock.
Edward S. Curtis's "Representations": Then and Now.
Government Use of Strategic Litigation: The Alberta Exported Gas Tax Reference.
Religious Organizations and the "Relocation" of Persons of Japanese Ancestry in North America; Evaluating Advocacy.
Books Received.
As Though There Was No Boundary: the Shipshaw Project and Continental Integration.
Introduction: Managing Canada-U.S. Relations in Difficult Times.
Canada-U.S. Relations after Free Trade: Lessons Learned and Unmet Challenges.
Political Economy, Civil Society, and the Deep Integration Debate in Canada.
Canadian--American Environmental Relations: Interoperability and Politics.
Trends in Child Care/Early Childhood Education/Early Childhood Development Policy in Canada and the United States.
Asymmetry and Paradox: Social Policy and the U.S-Canada Bilateral Relationship.
A Global Power Shift in the Making.
Seeing the Forest.
Strengthening African Leadership.
Beyond Kyoto.
The Myth Behind China's Miracle.
History and the Hyperpower.
A Republican Foreign Policy.
Saving Iraq From Its Oil.
Containing Iraq: Sanctions Worked.
Is America Losing Its Edge?
Buying Time in Tehran.
Was Iraq a Fool's Errand?
Talking Turkey.
Spies Like Us.
The Venezuelan Oil Crisis.
Misunderestimating Terrorism.
A Forward-Looking Partnership.
The Neglected Home Front.
What Went Wrong in Iraq.
Why Democracies Excel.
How to Counter WMD.
Turkey's Dreams of Accession.
Indonesia's Quiet Revolution.
Riding for a Fall.
Breakdown in the Andes.
Venezuela after the Referendum.
Politics, Access History.
Gangsters and Prostitutes.
Widening the War on Terror.
The Remittance Lifeline.
Binational Cooperation.
Dream or Déjà Vu?
Beyond the FTAA.
Invisible Immigration.
A New Evo-lution?
Indigenous Mobilization.
People in the Streets.
Blood in the Marketplace.
Carving Their Niche.
A Student-Directed Model for Designing a Science/Social Studies Curriculum.
Using Political Cartoons to Improve Your Verbal Questioning.
Teaching about Global Human Rights for Global Citizenship.
Buyer Beware! Economics Activities for Middle School Students.
Jefferson's Views on Education: Implications for Today's Social Studies.
Creating Thinking and Inquiry Tasks that Reflect the Concerns and Interests of Adolescents.
Leonard S. Kenworthy: An Early Source of Ideas and Activities for Teaching Social Studies.
An Economic Analysis of September 11th.
Teaching about History and Science through Archaeology Service Learning.
Using Poetry in Social Studies Classes to Teach about Cultural Diversity and Social Justice.
The Power of a Good Book in Fourth Grade Social Studies.
Back to Basics, But That's Just the Beginning: Some Reflections after Observing an Exemplary Middle School Unit.
Understanding Japan through the Lens of Moral Education.
The Wage Is Right!
Preservice Teachers Report the Impact of High-Stakes Testing.
Involving Preservice Teachers in Social Studies Content Standards: Thought of a Methods Professor.
A Man's Gotta Do What a Man's Gotta Do! Masculinity and Manhood in Social Studies Education.
Contemporary Immigration: First-Person Fiction from Cuba, Haiti, Korea, and Cambodia.
Immigrants as Portrayed in Children's Picture Books.
Bicentennial Blues.
Nkanu and Mbeko Art and Ritual.
Urban Textile Traditions of Tunisia.
Ethiopian Figurines from Mugar Monastery in Shawa.
Dance Uniform History in the Church of Nazareth Baptists The Move to Tradition.
Painting Ethiopia The Life and Work of Qes Adamu Tesfaw.
Artists Advertising Themselves.
ACASA, March 31, 2004.
The African Collection at the Hood Museum of Art.
Kabiito Richard's Paintings.
Folk Art and Personal Independence in Tanzania.
Propaganda for the Millions.
The Unofficial History.
A Review of Ten Years of Democracy.
South African Heritage Development in the First Decade of Democracy.
10 South African Documentary Photographers.
Making Art in a Time of Struggle.
Looking Back at the Art of Paul Stopforth.
Berni Searle.
Art Imitates Architecture: The Saint Philip Reliquary in Renaissance Florence.
Poussin, Plague, and Early Modern Medicine.
By the Sword and the Plow: Théodore Chassériau's Cour des Comptes Murals and Algeria.
Hats and Hierarchy in Gustave Courbet's The Meeting.
Photography, Painting, and Charles Sheeler's View of New York.
The Work of Marketplaces in Colonialist Texts on Mexico City.
Arabic Natural Philosophy as Christian Ethics in the Libro del cavallero de Dios.
Rhetorical and Narrative Paradigms in Fernando del Pulgar's Crónica de los Reyes Católicos.
The Metaphor of Usury in Terra Nostra.
The Lady Vanishes.
NEGOTIATING EMPIRE AND DESIRE IN LOPE DE VEGA'S CARLOS V EN FRANCIA.
BODY TALK: SPACE, COMMUNICATION, AND CORPOREALITY IN LUCÍA ETXEBARRIA'S BEATRIZ Y LOS CUERPOS CELESTES.
THE PAINTING OF THE BANQUET SCENE IN ABEL SANCHEZ.
HENRY BUCKLE'S DECADENT SPAIN IN ORTEGA'S ESPAÑA INVERTEBRADA.
MENC NOTES.
The Motivations of Exceptional Musicians.
Lessons from a Master: Using the "Bernstein Formula"in Music Classrooms.
New Light on a Prism: The Concert for All Reasons.
Harmonizing and Improvising in the Choral Rehearsal: ASequential Approach.
Who Is "At Risk" in the Music Classroom?
Using MIDI Accompaniments for Music Learning at Schooland at Home.
Beyond Beethoven and the Boyz: Women's Music inRelation to History and Culture.
MENC TODAY.
Educate Our Advocates!
Teach Them How to Practice.
Adapting Music Instruction for Students with Dyslexia.
Inclusion Strategies That Work.
How to Start an Adult Community Chorus.
Use of Image and Metaphor in Developing Vocal Technique inChoirs.
Electing Music Advocates.
National Certification: One Teacher's Experience.
Listen to the Fans.
Talking about Music: Better Questions? Better Discussions!
Teaching Problem Solving in Practice.
Teachers Teaching Teachers: Revitalization in an Urban Setting.
Composers and Children: A Future Creative Force?
Interdisciplinary Lessons in Musical Acoustics: TheScience--Math--Music Connection.
Reconceiving the Standards and the School Music Program.
The Successful Student-Teaching Experience: Thoughts fromthe Ivory Tower.
Becoming a Teacher: Stories of the First Few Years.
Why Band Directors Leave: From the Mouths of Maestros.
An Archival Impulse.
Should We Put an End to Projection?
Antagonism and Relational Aesthetics.
An Interview with Pierre Huyghe.
No Ghost.
Room-for-Play: Benjamin's Gamble with Cinema.
They Might Be Giants: Carleton Watkins, Galen Clark, and the Big Tree.
The Invention Without a Future.
Limits of the Narrator's Knowledge in Fielding's Joseph Andrews: A Contribution to a Theory of Negated Knowledge in Fiction.
Are Fielding's Shamela and Richardson's Pamela One and the Same Person? A Contribution to the Problem of the Number of Fictive Worlds.
Some Problems Concerning a Theory of Fiction(ality).
Aesthetic Illusion as an Effect of Fiction.
Where Historiographic Metafiction and Narratology Meet: Towards an Applied Cultural Narratology.
Coda: The Next Generation.
Introduction.
Reader Figures in Narrative.
The "Complementary Story": Outline of a Reader-Oriented Theory of the Novel.
Preface.
Toward a Cognitive Rhetoric of Imagism.
Stylistics in France Today.
GAMBLING ON CASINO CASES.
The Court Comes Together.
Making Brown Real.
Case Closed. Now What? (cover story)
M.D. WITH A MISSION.
the Outside Looking in.
THE TOP TEN IN TECH.
THE SUBTLE ART OF THE PARTY.
Consumer COMPLAINTS.
A Question of CLASS.
Where's THE BRIEF?
The Changing Face of Gay Legal Issues. (cover story)
ENRON LAWYERS IN THE HOT SEAT.
Red HOOK EXPERIMENT. (cover story)
PUNITIVE PRECISION.
GREATER SCRUTINY FOR NONPROFITS.
dna DRAGNET.
It's Not Just About Money. (cover story)
Towering Titans.
TELLING Secrets.
SMOOTH Operators.
THE RULES CHANGE WITH AGE.
AMERICAN BAR ENDOWMENT.
STAY TUNED. (cover story)
ANOTHER CLOSE CALL.
Back from the Brink.
As WorldCom Turns, Cases Pile Up.
OLD Continent, New Deal.
Bullet Proof.
ANTIQUATED BEFORE THEY CAN OSSIFY: STATES THAT FAIL BEFORE THEY FORM.
STATE BUILDING AND THE NON-NATION-STATE.
DISCOURSES OF DENIAL: SILENCING THE PALESTINIANS, DELEGITIMIZING THEIR CLAIMS.
CONSTITUTIONALIZING DEMOCRACY IN FRACTURED SOCIETIES.
DECOLONIZATION AND STATE BUILDING IN SOUTH ASIA.
RECONSTRUCTING THE CONGO.
STATE BUILDING IN COLOMBIA: GETTING PRIORITIES STRAIGHT.
FROM WAR ECONOMY TO PEACE ECONOMY? RECONSTRUCTION AND STATE BUILDING IN AFGHANISTAN.
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL POLICY IN CUBA: "THE SPECIAL PERIOD"
WHY THERE IS NO SCIENCE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION.
TORT LAW FOR FEDERALISTS (AND THE REST OF US): PRIVATE LAW IN DISGUISE.
FEAR-MONGERING TORTS AND THE EXAGGERATED DEATH OF DIVING.
THE NEW FEDERAL REGULATION OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE.
PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION: THE CASE FOR COMPENSATION.
ENVIRONMENTAL PERSPECTIVES: MOVING TOWARD A MARKET-ORIENTED MIDDLE GROUND.
PRIVATE PROPERTY AND THE POLITICS OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.
THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION AS A STRUCTURE OF LIBERTY.
INTEREST GROUPS, POWER POLITICS, AND THE RISKS OF WTO MISSION CREEP.
IS CIVIL LITIGATION A THREAT TO FREEDOM?
BELIEVING SIX IMPROBABLE THINGS: MEDICAL MALPRACTICE AND "LEGAL FEAR'
THE ANTIDISCRIMINATION EIGHTH AMENDMENT.
WHY IS CONGRESS STILL REGULATING NONCOMMERCIAL ACTIVITY?
THE CONSTITUTIONAL OPTION TO CHANGE SENATE RULES AND PROCEDURES: A MAJORITARIAN MEANS TO OVER COME THE FILIBUSTER.
Historical Lessons to Extend America's Great Power Tenure.
Economic Crises and Political Change.
The Kurdish Question in Perspective.
Russian Energy Policy in the Caspian Basin.
The Road to Globalization Runs through Women's Struggle Iran and the Impact of the Nobel Peace Prize.
Realism and U.S. Foreign Policy toward North Korea.
Ukraine Evolving Foreign Policy in a New State.
Universal Rights and Cultural Relativism Hinduism and Islam Deconstructed.
Goodness Armed with Power.
Democratic Prospects in Central Asia.
Blood Diamonds and Africa's Armed Conflicts in the Post-Cold War Era.
Democratic Revolutions.
Surgical advances in tonsillectomy: Report of a roundtable discussion.
Hearing loss as the initial presentation of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Intracranial neuromuscular choristoma: A case report and literature review.
Grisel's syndrome: The two-hit hypothesis-A case report and literature review.
Rhinoorbital mucormycosis secondary to Rhizopus oryzae: A case report and literature review.
Radiofrequency volume tissue reduction of the tonsils: Case report and histopathologic findings.
Craniocervical necrotizing fasciitis of odontogenic origin with mediastinal extension.
The role of the middle fossa approach in the management of traumatic facial paralysis.
Perineural invasion of the facial nerve by a cutaneous squamous cell cancer: A case report.
Childhood primary parotid non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with direct intracranial extension: A case report.
Spontaneous bilateral intrasphenoidal lateral encephaloceles: CT and MRI findings.
Bacteriology in patients with chronic sinusitis who have been medically and surgically treated.
Amyloid tumor of the larynx associated with plasma cell infiltration: Differential diagnosis.
Rosai-Dorfman disease with extranodal manifestation in the head.
Topical anesthesia of the airway and esophagus.
Office-based procedures for the voice.
Office evaluation of the tracheobronchial tree.
Office evaluation of swallowing.
Partial tetrasomy of chromosome 22: Genetic and surgical implications for otolaryngologists.
Obstructing lesions of the endolymphatic sac and duct mimicking Ménière's disease.
Treatment of nasal valve collapse with transcutaneous and intranasal electric stimulation.
Modified submandibular sialoadenectomy.
Descending necrotizing mediastinitis: Ten years' experience.
Neck abscess secondary to cat-scratch disease.
Feasibility of treating hearing disorders with stem cells: Update.
Fluconazole nasal spray in the treatment of allergic fungal sinusitis: A pilot study.
What's in a fungus ball? Report of a case with submucosal invasion and tissue eosinophilia.
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor of the paranasal sinuses.
Pediatric intracapsular tonsillectomy with bipolar electrosurgical scissors.
Harmonic scalpel versus conventional tonsillectomy: A double-blind clinical trial.
Harmonic scalpel tonsillectomy versus hot electrocautery and cold dissection: An objective comparison.
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome and fetal rhabdomyoma: A case study.
Ototopical agents are superior to systemic therapy for the treatment of acute and chronic otitis media.
New developments in our understanding of ototoxicity.
Acute otitis externa: Treatment perspectives.
Sequelae of undiagnosed cervical vertebral osteomyelitis in intravenous drug abusers.
Modern acoustic reflectometry: Accuracy in diagnosing otitis media with effusion.
Ototopical ciprofloxacin in a glycerin vehicle for the treatment of acute external otitis.
Various presentations of fourth branchial pouch anomalies.
Enhancing Compliance at Department of Defense Facilities: Comparison of Three Environmental Audit Tools.
Where There's Hope, There's Change.
Hiring, Firing, Prison Food, Double Jeopardy, and Contempt of Court -- A Smorgasboard of Cases.
Reducing the Risk of Chemical Exposures in Schools.
Hazardous-Chemical Releases in the Home.
Artificial Christmas Trees: How Real Are the Lead Exposure Risks?
Kitchen Hood Performance in Food Service Operations.
City of Fort Worth Consumer Health Division-2004 Crumbine Award Winner.
Skills and Abilities Needed by Environmental Health Science and Protection Professionals in the Public Sector.
The Recovery of Bacteria from the Handpiece of a High School Telephone.
The Readability and Audience Acceptance of Printed Health Promotion Materials Used by Environmental Health Departments.
Health Education and Food Safety Behavior in the University Setting.
Skills, Knowledge, and Abilities of Graduates from Accredited Environmental Health Science and Protection Undergraduate Programs.
Every Kitchen's Dirty Little Secret: Cardboard-Bacteria Superstore and Roach Motel.
A Systems-Based Food Safety Evaluation: An Experimental Approach.
Side-by-Side Comparison of Three Sampling Methods for Aerosolized Endotoxin in a Wastewater Treatment Facility.
Detection of Latex Allergens by Immunoelectron Microscopy in Ambient Air (PM&lt;sub&gt;10&lt;/sub&gt;) in Oslo, Norway (1997-2005).
Environmental Health Professionals and Emergency Preparedness: Canadian Perspectives.
Calcium Needs in Children.
Female Adolescents' Knowledge of Bone Health Promotion Behaviors and Osteoporosis Risk Factors.
Test of an Educational Intervention for Osteoporosis Prevention With U.S. Adolescents.
The Female Athlete Syndrome.
Osteoporosis.
Paget's Disease. (cover story)
Death of a Lifestyle.
Diffuse Idiopathic Skeletal Hyperostosis. (cover story)
Compartment Syndrome.
Understanding and Meeting the Needs of Farmers With Amputations. (cover story)
The Unstable Shoulder.
HIPAA-Clinical and Ethical Considerations for Nurses.
Unique Issues in Pediatric Spinal Cord Injury.
Height Change and Bone Mineral Density.
Spirituality in Nursing.
Massage Therapy for the Orthopaedic Patient.
The Use of Guided Imagery to Manage Pain in an Elderly Orthopaedic Population.
New Drug Developments.
Un Clown Biologique.
Crossing Over.
Why I Don't Live in America.
Against Work.
Dining with Robots.
Unraveling Ariadne's Thread.
AT LARGE AND AT SMALL.
Re: Re: Re: Re: Re: Joyce.
An Orphaned Writer.
Reading Aventuras de Tom Sawyer.
Houston and History.
Heavy Meta.
Unriddling.
2004: best, notable & recommended.
north of 49: resource links best of 2003.
recommended translated books: a longitudinal study(1990-2000).
making the case for pleasure reading.
engaging the community to support student success.
powering up the school library--and teacher-librarian.
digital learning objects.
listen to your school's "primary voices".
challenging the gender divide: improving literacy for all.
going beyond the debate: using technology and instructionfor a balanced reading program.
demystifying the evaluation process for parents: rubricsfor marking student research projects.
using data in the school library.
the civic mission of schools: key ideas in aresearch-based report on civic education in the US.
reading for pleasure falling among US adults.
girls and gaming: a summary of the research withimplications for practice.
school library accessibility: the role of assistivetechnology.
web site evaluation: how would your school's web sitemeasure up?
literature circles.
computing in the palm of your hand.
and furthermore.
eric resources on girls and gaming.
making an author's visit your best 'good time'.
using international literature to enhance the curriculum.
connecting with aboriginal students.
the mandate: to help low-performing schools.
and furthermore.
eric resources on serving minority students.
using focus group interviews to improve library servicesfor youth.
america's most wanted: teachers who collaborate.
going beyond google for faster and smarter web searching.
bringing vision to practice: planning and provisioning thenew library resource center.
evaluating and selecting online magazines for children.
news and notes.
multiplying literacies in school libraries.
The White Crown of Works: Cyprian's Early Pastoral Ministry of Almsgiving in Carthage.
Medicine and Moral Reform: The Place of Practical Piety in John Wesley's Art of Physic.
Reversing the Curse: Agricultural Millennialism at the Illinois Industrial University.
The 1904-05 Welsh Revival: Modernization, Technologies, and Techniques of the Self.
A Suitable Abode for Christ: The Church Building as Symbol of Ascetic Renunciation in Early Monasticism.
Jehoshaphat and His Prayer among Sixteenth-Century Lutherans.
The Evolution of the Lutheran Pastors' Manual in the Sixteenth Century.
Your Every Move.
Public Participation and the Erosion of Democracy.
capital punishment and violence.
Epicures at the Food Court.
TERROR, EVIL, and the New Cold War.
HUMANISM versus the MILITARIZATION of America.
STRANGE FRUIT IN ABU GHRAIB: THE PRIVATIZATION OF TORTURE.
The Gift of the West.
THE DEMOCRATIC IDEAL VERSUS THE STATE OF THE UNION.
The Privacy Paradox.
What Do We Do Now that the Sexual Devolution is Over?
Technology and Tomorrow: A Challenge to Liberty.
Militarism: A Way of Life.
Why I'm Glad My Daughter Had Underage Sex.
A Humanist Looks at Polyamory.
Popular Ambassadors of Freethought.
the Atomic Fish: The Rising Controversy of Genetically Modified Pets.
Bush's Faith-based Legacy.
The Moon's the Limit.
Is Scientology in Your Schools?
JESUS, MEL GIBSON, & THE DEMON JEW.
Taking Radical Responsibility to Create a Humanized World.
A Re-examination of the Cross-race Effect: The Role of Race, Inversion, and Basketball Trivia.
Comparison of Four Measures of Values: Their Relative Usefulness in Graduate Education Advisement.
A Brief Measure of General Worry: The Three Item Worry Index.
Conformity to Misinformation and Time Delay Negatively Affect Eyewitness Confidence and Accuracy.
The Effects of Screening, Training, and Experience of Air Force Fighter Pilots: The Plasticity of the Ability to Extrapolate and Track Multiple Objects in Motion.
Facing Off: Causal Attributions and Affective Reactions of Parent Fans to Objective Outcomes and Perceived Performance.
Effects of Odorant Administration on Pain and Psychophysiological Measures in Humans.
Effects of Intro/Extraversion and Sex on Social Internet Use.
Nutritional Differences as a Function of Early Sexual Maturation Among African American Girls.
Acculturation, Body Image, and Eating Attitudes among Black and White College Students.
Is Recall Rage Increasing?
Television Sitcom Exposure and Aggressive Communication: A Priming Perspective.
The Development and Validation of a New Measure of Spirituality.
Between a Rock and a Hard Place: Biased Assimilation of Scientific Information in the Face of Commitment.
Task and Ego Orientation in Sport Questionnaire: Testing Factor Structure and Invariance Among Adolescent Hispanic Athletes.
A Psychometric Investigation of Logotherapy Measures and the Outcome Questionnaire (OQ-45.2).
Heartbeat Perception in Chronic Migraine Sufferers: A Brief Report.
Preference for Solitude and Attitude Toward One's Favorite Celebrity.
Do Online Matchmaking Tests Work? An Assessment of Preliminary Evidence for a Publicized 'Predictive Model of Marital Success'
Individual Differences in Reward Sensitivity: Implications for Psychostimulant Abuse Vulnerability.
Self-Control, Perceived Opportunity, and Attitudes as Predictors of Academic Dishonesty.
The Relationship Between Types of Female Athletic Participation and Female Body Type.
A Model of Childhood Perceived Peer Harassment: Analyses of the Canadian National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth Data.
Sex Role Group Differences in Specific, Academic, and General Self-Efficacy.
The Endowment--Institutional Affinity Effect.
Factor Structure of the Strong Interest Inventory With a Chinese High School Sample.
Task Characteristics and Performance in Interpersonal Cognitive Problem Solving.
A Meta-Analysis of the Published Research on the Affective, Cognitive, and Behavioral Effects of Corporal Punishment.
From Empire to Democracy: Effects of Social Progress on Turkish Writers.
Thinking Styles: University Students' Preferred Teaching Styles and Their Conceptions of Effective Teachers.
Self-Serving Judgments About Winning the Lottery.
Self-Estimates of Intelligence: A Study in Two African Countries.
THEOLOGY'S RESPONSIBILITY AND TASKS IN TODAY'S CHURCH AND WORLD.
CULTURES, RELIGIONS, AND POWER: PROCLAIMING CHRIST IN THE UNITED STATES TODAY.
WHEN MAGISTERIUM BECOMES IMPERIUM: PETER DAMIAN ON THE ACCOUNTABILITY OF BISHOPS FOR SCANDAL.
FOR WHAT SHALL WE REPENT? REFLECTIONS ON THE AMERICAN BISHOPS, THEIR TEACHING, AND SLAVERY IN THE UNITED STATES, 1839-1861.
FOUNDATIONS ONCE DESTROYED: THE CATHOLIC CHURCH AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE.
RECOGNIZING THE PRESENCE OF CHRIST IN THE LITURGICAL ASSEMBLY.
REMEMBERING ROSA PARKS: RECOGNIZING A CONTEMPORARY PROPHETIC ACT.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
THE INDISSOLUBILITY OF MARRIAGE: REASONS TO RECONSIDER.
New Breed of Beet Geneticists Shows How Sweet It Can Be.
Germplasms from previous study may thwart new aphid biotype.
Salt-Worthy Flowers Are Stunning - and Sensible. (cover story)
Fungus Unleashed To Combat Yellow Starthistle.
TSEs Touch Off ARS Research. (cover story)
Putting Out the Fire.
Fruit Flies Flee Paradise.
PaPAYa! High-Tech Tactics Enhance a Tropical Favorite. (cover story)
Study Examines Long-Term Health Effects of Soy Infant Formula.
Scientists Get Under Eggplant's Skin.
Rose Gardens Make Fruit Orchards More Inviting to Friendly Wasps.
Probiotics Protect Poultry From Pathogens.
A River Runs Through It.
Hungry Mite May Quell Old World Climbing Fern.
Finding Answers to Diet-Related Illness in the Delta.
Researchers Produce Innovation in Dietary Recall.
Improving Sunshine Bass Production.
Flavorful Coffees and Creamy Macadamia Nuts.
What's Buzzing with Africanized Honey Bees?
Dairy Researchers Mix It Up in the Pasture.
Mycologists Help Guard U.S. Borders.
How Wet's Our Planet?
Saving Little Topashaw. (cover story)
A Bum Rap for Agricultural Dust?
SMR--This Honey of a Trait Protects Bees From Deadly Mites.
New Options for Lychee and Longan Fans and Farmers.
TAMEing Melaleuca With IPM. (cover story)
Campylobacter Unmasking the Secret Genes of a Food-Poisoning Culprit. (cover story)
Homing in on Hopper Hordes!
ARS Leads in Assessing Risk in Transgenics.
Climate Warming Shakes up Species.
Progressive Nitrogen Limitation of Ecosystem Responses to Rising Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide.
Quenching Urban Thirst: Growing Cities and Their Impacts on Freshwater Ecosystems.
Microbial Diversity Unbound.
The Puzzles of Population Cycles and Outbreaks of Small Mammals Solved?
Coverage Provided by the Global Protected-Area System: Is It Enough?
Global Gap Analysis: Priority Regions for Expanding the Global Protected-Area Network.
Mapping More of Terrestrial Biodiversity for Global Conservation Assessment.
Key Biodiversity Areas as Site Conservation Targets.
Financial Costs and Shortfalls of Managing and Expanding Protected-Area Systems in Developing Countries.
Elements of Scientific Visualization in Basic Neuroscience Research.
Fear of Fish: The Contaminant Controversy.
Ratcheting Down the Coral Reefs.
Close Encounters of the Deep-Sea Kind.
A Three-Tiered Approach to Enhance Undergraduate Education in Bioethics.
Origins of HIV: The Interrelationship between Nonhuman Primates and the Virus.
How Well Do Biology Teachers Understand the Legal Issues Associated with the Teaching of Evolution?
MAKING CLIMATE HOT.
Strangers in Our Midst: The Problem of Invasive Alien Species. (cover story)
Markets for Biodiversity Services: POTENTIAL ROLES AND CHALLENGES.
TOWARD ECOLOGICAL CITIES.
IS BIGGER BETTER?
Before and After The Day After Tomorrow. (cover story)
GREENHOUSE GAS TRADING IN EUROPE.
What's at Risk? (cover story)
A Great Step Further but Still More to Go.
Translating Life's Diversity.
Wind Power. (cover story)
Should the Journal of Information Systems (JIS) Publish Education Research?
Are Financial Auditors Overconfident in Their Ability to Assess Risks Associated with Enterprise Resource Planning Systems?
An Analysis of the Effects of Continuous Monitoring Controls on e-Commerce System Performance.
Growing a Nontraditional Accounting Firm: Warren and Associates.
Discussion of: Growing a Nontraditional Accounting Firm: Warren and Associates.
SportsStuff.com: A Case Study on XML Technologies, e-Business Processes, and Accounting Information Systems.
Discussion of: SportsStuff.com: A Case Study on XML Technologies, e-Business Processes, and Accounting Information Systems.
Firm Performance Effects in Relation to the Implementation and Use of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems.
Discussion of: Firm Performance Effects in Relation to the Implementation and Use of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems.
Linking Business Processes and Transaction Cycles.
Accounting Information Systems Research Opportunities Using Personality Type Theory and the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator.
Alternative Personality Measurements.
Authors' Reply to Commentary on Accounting Information Systems Research Opportunities Using Personality Type Theory and the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator.
Development of the Journal of Information Systems from the Editors' Perspectives.
The Evaluation of Risky Information Technology Investment Decisions.
Computational Models as a Knowledge Management Tool: A Process Model of the Critical Judgments Made during Audit Planning.
Selecting an Audit Software Package for Classroom Use.
MAKING the Grade.
Surgical analysis. (cover story)
LESSONS OF THE BLACKOUT.
High-Tech DELIVERY.
Not even the kitchen sink.
new products.
resource file.
FLUID HANDLING AND FLUID POWER.
A Case of the Vapors.
share the WEALTH.
Tuned to the Universe.
HIP ACTION.
A Model Mission.
new products.
the ME resource FILE.
showing up happy.
six sigma for the little guy.
SPACE CALLS. (cover story)
YOU GOTTA PAY TO PLAY.
TUTANKHAMEN'S TRIBOLOGY.
new products.
The 2003-2004 ASME Fellows . . .
FREEDOM OF CHOICE.
FROM SEA to SINK.
DOWN BUT NOT OUT.
new products.
ENGINEERING WITHOUT LIMIT.
SPECIAL DELIVERY.
REDEFINING THE ME. (cover story)
Eyes of Mars.
INF0RMATI0N IN ORDER.
new products.
Keep an Eye on Hypergiant Rho Cassiopeiae.
Reconstructing the Heavens: Archaeoastronomy and the Ancient Maya World.
Truth and Beauty in Cosmology: Does the Universe Have an Aesthetic?
Mystery Star 1054.
Traveling to the Edge.
Invisible Frontier.
sky events.
The Transit of Venus: Twice in a Lifetime.
Creating a Digital Repository.
Planet-Building on the Grandest Scales.
Peering into the Dark.
Radio Astronomy on the Cheap.
King of the Kuiper Belt.
Goddess of Love & the Hand of God.
Bright-Lights Big City.
sky events.
Exploring Invisible Skies.
Imagining Reality.
By the Light of the Moon.
Although Saturn holds center stage, don't miss seeing a bright comet pass the Pleiades star cluster.
What Astronomy Might Have Been.
Fingerprints from Rainbows.
Refining Refracted Moonlight.
The Moon dips into Earth's shadow while Venus and Jupiter stage a spectacular predawn conjunction.
Launching the Right Stuff.
Mud's Eye View.
Send In the Clouds.
Destination: Titan. (cover story)
Sight for Sore Eyes.
The Drunken Monkey Hypothesis.
The Importance of Being: Constant.
Ties That Bind. (cover story)
Mouth to Mouth.
Ringside Seat.
Climb Every Waterfall!
Push for Kerry by Scientists Draws Republican Ire.
Edward Teller's Scientific Life.
Edward Teller in the Public Arena.
New Books.
Physics Nobel Prize Goes to Gross, Politzer, and Wilczek for Their Discovery of Asymptotic Freedom.
Magnetoresistive Tunnel Junctions Look Ever More Promising for Magnetic Random Access Memory.
Thermodynamics Explains the Symmetry of Spherical Viruses.
Physics Fellows Bring Science to Policymaking.
The Hydrogen Economy.
Transforming the Electric Infrastructure.
The German Physical Society Under National Socialism.
New Products.
Lovely as a Tree Amplitude: Hidden Structures Underlie Feynman Diagrams.
A Dark-Horse Entry in the Race for an Excitonic Condensate.
Science Board Warns of Uncertain Future for US Science and Engineering Leadership.
Lorentz In variance on Trial.
Basic Choices and Constraints on Long-Term Energy Supplies.
Solid Helium-4 in Bulk Doesn't Go With the Flow.
New Experiments Demonstrate Quantum Optics on a Chip.
Three Newly Discovered Exoplanets Have Masses Comparable to Neptune's.
Detecting Illicit Radioactive Sources.
Ethics and the Welfare of the Physics Profession. (cover story)
Trust and the Future of Research. (cover story)
The Scientist's Code of Ethics. (cover story)
New All-Electrical Measurement Schemes Can Detect the Spin State of a Single Electron.
Presidential Candidates Speak Out on Science Policies.
Were Fundamental Constants Different in the Past?
Shallow-Water Acoustics.
AVS 2004 EXHIBITOR PROGRAM.
New Books.
2004 Conference Program Descriptions.
Mongolia & Siberia.
Risking Ourselves in the Creative Process.
Pixel Composites.
The Hamster Wheel of Progress.
Shooting in the Pribilofs of Alaska.
News.
A Look Back.
Distinctive Image.
Taking Photographs of Winter Sports Action Indoors.
BODIE, CALIFORNIA: a ghostly feast for photographers.
Mind and Eyes: Photography as a visual art of common sense.
2002-2003 Audit Report.
PHOTOGRAPHING THE AMISH. (cover story)
News.
BOLIVIA.
Seeing the LIGHT.
The Unique Bowerbirds of Northeastern Australia.
Night Shots of Flowing Lava.
The "Brady Bit"
News.
Picture Yourself in Minneapolis.
Inle Lake...
WHO'S WHO in Photography 2003.
A Chronology of the Exhibitions of Photography.
Oberwallis.
2004 PSA International Exhibition. (cover story)
Awards & Honors Recipients.
NEW DIVISIONAL BYLAWS.
An American Safari.
Awakened by Midnight Chants: Timket in Ethiopia.
Implementing Science Notebooks in the Primary Grades.
news notes.
COMPUTER NEWS.
Power in Numbers. (cover story)
The Student Credit Hour.
A COMPETENCY ALTERNATIVE.
College Education for Low-Income Students.
Never Let It Rest.
The New Core Competence of the Community College.
Summers on Women in Science.
What Should REAUTHORIZATION Be About? (cover story)
Point/Counterpoint.
Accept AVIOD resist.
BEYOND THE FEAR FACTOR.
No Talent Left BEHIND.
RETHINKING Academic Work and Workplaces.
Easing the Exit.
A New Social Compact Demands Real Change.
Moving from I to We.
Gender, Family, and Flexibility -Why They're Important in the Academic Workplace.
AAHE's Legacy.
In Memoriam.
To Dignify the Profession of the Teacher.
Higher Education.
CASTLs in the Air.
RETHINKING AND REFRAMING THE CARNEGIE CLASSIFICATION. (cover story)
The Learned Report on Teacher Education.
The Story of the American Democracy Project.
HALLMARK OF A WORLD-CLASS UNIVERSITY.
COLLEGE STUDENT BELIEFS ABOUT WOMEN: SOME GENDER DIFFERENCES.
THE UNNECESSARY TENSION BETWEEN LEARNING COMMUNITIES AND INTELLECTUAL GROWTH.
TEACHER CERTIFICATION EXAMS: WHAT ARE THE PREDICTORS OF SUCCESS?
EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING IN THE INTRODUCTORY CLASS: THE ROLE OF MINOR LEAGUE HOCKEY IN TEACHING SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY.
ON BEING RESPECTED OR LIKED: PRINCIPLE-CENTERED TEACHING.
HELP-SEEKING ATTITUDES AMONG AFRICAN AMERICAN COLLEGE STUDENTS.
SEX DIFFERENCES IN MOTIVATIONAL TRAITS AND ETHICAL DECISION MAKING AMONG GRADUATING ACCOUNTING MAJORS.
STUDENT PERCEPTIONS OF TWO STATE UNIVERSITIES IN TEXAS: A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS.
USING THE GOOGLE SEARCH ENGINE TO DETECT WORD-FOR-WORD PLAGIARISM IN MASTER'S THESES: A PRELIMINARY STUDY.
A QUALITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF PERSONAL AND ACADEMIC STRESSORS AMONG KOREAN COLLEGE STUDENTS: AN EXPLORATORY STUDY.
INTERCOUPLE DATING ON A COLLEGE CAMPUS.
THE STORY BEHIND THE CATALYST: CHANNING CLUB VS. THE BOARD OF REGENTS OF TTU.
MIDDLE SCHOOL VARIABLES THAT PREDICT COLLEGE ATTENDANCE FOR FIRST-GENERATION STUDENTS.
A COMPARISON OF TEACHING PATTERNS OF STUDENT TEACHERS AND EXPERIENCED TEACHERS IN THREE DISTINCT SETTINGS: IMPLICATIONS FOR PREPARING TEACHERS FOR ALL SETTINGS.
THE EARLY CHILDHOOD ENVIRONMENT RATING SCALE-REVISED AS A TOOL TO IMPROVE CHILD CARE CENTERS.
IMPROVING SOCIAL SKILLS: A TRAINING PRESENTATION TO PARENTS.
PERCEPTUAL DIFFERENCE BETWEEN INTERN TEACHERS AND UNIVERSITY SUPERVISORS ON THE EXPECTATIONS AND PREFERENCES FOR THE FIELDWORK PROGRAM.
SOCIOLOGY OF TWENTIETH CENTURY CONGREGATE CARE OF THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED-RECOLLECTIONS.
EFFECTIVE MULTICULTURAL TEACHER EDUCATION PROGRAMS: METHODOLOGICAL AND CONCEPTUAL ISSUES.
ANALYSIS OF FACTORS INFLUENCING NEGATIVE ATTITUDE TOWARD TEACHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA.
The Better Angels Within.
Reflections on Selectivity.
The Oy Oy Oy Show.
The Problem with Problems.
DARKNESS INVISIBLE.
FEEDING FRIENDLY.
designing healthy schools.
BEING AN ADULT IN A TEENAGE WORLD.
PREVENTING HARMFUL RELATIONSHIPS IN SCHOOL.
EXCELLENCE THROUGH wellness.
How About That Whole Child?
A 3-TIER MODEL OF EDUCATIONAL INTERVENTION.
Really High Stakes Tests.
Minds.
What is education for?
greening Athenian.
SUSTAINABLE DESIGN.
THE living machine AND beyond.
Local ground [initiative].
LEEDing the WAY.
HOW GREEN IS YOUR CAMPUS?
The dangers of education.
IN SEARCH OF HARMONY.
THE MANY FACES OF BUDDHA.
NAIS schools on the leading edge.
Utopian Schools.
putting HUMANITY first.
WHY EDUCATION IS STILL PRE-MODERN and what we can do about it.
coming back to play.
DIVERSITY [15 YEARS FROM NOW].
becoming attuned, transforming a school a tale of three teachers.
envisioning the future society.
creating a just place.
BLURRING THE DIVIDE.
HOLDER OF THE TIN CUP.
Around the World in 80 Books.
Teaming for Sustainable Leadership.
sustainable leadership.
WHEN HOPE & HISTORY RHYME.
Extent of Faculty Members' Use of Internet in the University of Benin, Nigera.
Psychological Perspectives in Assessing Mathematics Learning Needs.
Development of a Questionnaire for Determining the Factors in Technology Integration Among Teachers.
Changes to Students' Learning Processes Following Instruction on the Topic.
Effects of Systematic Desensitisation (SD) Therapy on the Reduction of Test Anxiety Among Adolescents in Nigerian Schools.
Impact of Citizenship Education on the Civic Consciousness of Nigerian Youth.
Teaching and Learning Operant Principles in Animal Shelters: Perspectives from Faculty, Students, and Shelter Staff.
Now That I'm Out in the Field: Student Teaching and Valuing Diversity.
Using Axline's Eight Principles of Play Therapy with Mexican-American Children.
Promoting Maintenance and Generalization Through Cognitive Decision Making Training.
Using Student Peer Evaluations to Evaluate Team Taught Lessons.
Examining Perceptions of Mathematics Teaching Effectiveness among Elementary Preservice Teachers with Differing Levels of Mathematics Teacher Efficacy.
On-line Instruction: Are the Outcomes the Same?
Analysis of Teachers' Concerns in Selected Alabama Public Schools.
Themes to Emphasize in the Geography Curriculum.
An Investigation of Vocational Interests and Noctcaelador.
Assessment of Stress in Physician Assistant Students.
Principles of Effective Instruction -- General Standards for Teachers and Instructional Designers.
Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal, Form-S For Education Majors.
Parental Involvement in the Classroom.
A Sociocultural Perspective: Language Arts Framework, Vocabulary Activities and English Language Learners in a Second Grade Mixed Classroom.
Creating an Effective Strategic Plan for the School District.
Students' Perceptions on Factors of Statistics Anxiety and Instructional Strategies.
Effectiveness of Lesson Planning: Factor Analysis.
Review Sessions and Results: Competency Testing in the Capstone Business Class.
A Comparison of Lecture Ratings by Native Speakers of English with EFL Students at Two Universities: University of Mississippi and Dokuz Eylul University.
Aspiration Growth, Talent Development, and Self-Fulfillment in a Context of Democratic Erosion.
Philosophical Sense: An Ampliative Twist in Gifted Education.
Bridging Generality and Specificity: The Amusement Park Theoretical (APT) Model of Creativity.
Depth Psychology and Giftedness: Bringing Soul to the Field of Talent Development and Giftedness.
Studying the Meaning of Giftedness: Inspiration From the Field of Cognitive Psychology.
Special Education Mentoring Within the Context of Rural Schools.
The Wyoming Collaborative Mentorship Academy: A Field-based Program for Certifying Fully Qualified Special Education Teachers in a Rural State.
Professional Development: When Teachers Plan and Deliver Their Own.
The Case for Cases in Preparing Special Educators for Rural Schools.
The Use of Problem-Based Learning in Rural Special Education Preservice Training Programs.
Perceived Needs of Students with Low-Incidence Disabilities in Rural Areas.
Low Incidence Disabilities and Personnel Preparation for Rural Areas: Current Status and Future Trends.
A Promising Practice: Low Incidence Teacher Education in Rural and Remote California.
Rural Transition: What Are the Limitations?
No Child Left Behind: A National Study of Its Impact on Special Education in Rural Schools.
NCLB and the Demand for Highly Qualified Teachers: Challenges and Solutions for Rural Schools.
NCLB, IDEA, and Alternative Routes in Preparation of Rural Special Education Teachers in High Incidence Areas.
Ethnically Diverse Rural Special Educators Who Are Highly Qualified: Does NCLB Make This Impossible?
Administrative Perspectives on the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLBA) for Students With Disabilities in Rural Settings.
No Child Left Behind and Students with Disabilities in Rural and Small Schools.
The Unique Nature of Middle School Counseling.
Developmental Assets and the Middle School Counselor.
Early Adolescents Development Across the Middle School Years: Implications for School Counselors.
Ethnic Identity Development in Early Adolescence: implications and Recommendations for Middle School Counselors.
Fostering Academic Development and Learning: Implications and Recommendations for Middle School Counselors.
Education-Career Planning and Middle School Counselors.
Family Engagement: A Collaborative, Systemic Approach for Middle School Counselors.
Cross-Gender Interactions in Middle School Counselor-Student Working Alliances: Challenges and Recommendations.
Using Service Learning to Achieve Middle School Comprehensive Guidance Program Goals.
An After-School Counseling Program for High-Risk Middle School Students.
Engaging Students in Classroom Guidance: Management Strategies for Middle School Counselors.
Counseling Latino immigrants in Middle School.
My Class Inventory--Short Form as an Accountability Tool for Elementary School Counselors to Measure Classroom Climate.
Training School Counselors in Program Evaluation.
Collective Self-Esteem and Burnout in Professional School Counselors.
Child Abuse Reporting by School Counselors.
A Closer Examination of Bipolar Disorder in School-Age Children.
A Model of Girls' School Delinquency: School Bonding and Reputation.
When Theory Collides with Practice: One Day in the Life of a Middle School Counselor.
Behavioral Parent Training as a Treatment for Externalizing Behaviors and Disruptive Behavior Disorders: A Meta-Analysis.
Father-School Communication in Preschool and Kindergarten.
The Effects of Task Demands and Additive Interspersal Ratios on Fifth-Grade Students' Mathematics Accuracy.
The Effects of the Paired Associates Strategy (PAS) on the Recall of Factual Information by Postsecondary Students With Learning Disabilities.
Early Childhood Experiences and Kindergarten Success: A Population-Based Study of a Large Urban Setting.
THE IMPACT OF PARENTAL ATTACHMENT AND FEELINGS OF ISOLATION ON ADOLESCENT FEAR OF CRIME AT SCHOOL.
SUCCESS OF TAIWANESE MOTHERS IN GUIDING ADOLESCENTS.
THE ROLE OF EGO-IDENTITY STATUS IN MATING PREFERENCES.
AN EXPLORATION OF ADOLESCENT EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE IN RELATION TO DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS.
THE NATURE OF CONNECTIONS: YOUNG FATHERS AND THEIR CHILDREN.
CORRELATES OF ADOLESCENT ASSERTIVENESS WITH HIV AVOIDANCE IN A FOUR-NATION SAMPLE.
DEMOGRAPHY, PSYCHOSOCIAL FACTORS, AND EMOTIONAL PROBLEMS OF KOREAN AMERICAN ADOLESCENTS.
I'M SICK OF BEING ME: DEVELOPMENTAL THEMES IN A SUICIDAL ADOLESCENT.
A FRAMEWORK FOR STUDYING MINORITY YOUTHS' TRANSITIONS TO FATHERHOOD: THE CASE OF PUERTO RICAN ADOLESCENTS.
MALE AND FEMALE DELINQUENCY TRAJECTORIES FROM PRE THROUGH MIDDLE ADOLESCENCE AND THEIR CONTINUATION IN LATE ADOLESCENCE.
OPTIMISTIC BIAS AMONG POTENTIAL PERPETRATORS AND VICTIMS OF YOUTH VIOLENCE.
A REVIEW OF RESEARCH ON THE EFFECTS OF RELIGION ON ADOLESCENT TOBACCO USE PUBLISHED BETWEEN 1990 AND 2003.
FAMILY FUNCTIONING AND EARLY ONSET OF SEXUAL INTERCOURSE IN LATINO ADOLESCENTS.
AN EXISTENTIAL VIEW OF ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT.
AN EXPLORATION OF THE ATTITUDINAL AND PERCEPTUAL DIMENSIONS OF BODY IMAGE AMONG MALE AND FEMALE ADOLESCENTS FROM SIX LATIN AMERICAN CITIES.
PSYCHOMETRIC PROPERTIES OF THE CHINESE FAMILY ASSESSMENT INSTRUMENT IN CHINESE ADOLESCENTS IN HONG KONG.
MENTAL HEALTH CONDITION OF THE ONLY-CHILD: A STUDY OF URBAN AND RURAL HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS IN CHINA.
PARENTAL ATTITUDES AND EGO IDENTITY STATUS OF TURKISH ADOLESCENTS.
A Temporary Diaspora: Contested Cultural Representations in Tuareg International Musical Performance.
The Expansion of Protestantism in Mexico: An Anthropological View.
Voluntary Organizations, Social Capital, and the Social Incorporation of Asian Indian Immigrants in the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex.
Author and Hero--Rereading Gregory Bateson: The Legacy of a Scientist.
Rethinking the Couvade.
Queen of the Chinese Colony: Gender, Nation, and Belonging in Diaspora.
The Ethnicity of Caste.
Orthodox Hybridities: Anti-Syncretism and Localization in the Evangelical Christianity of Thailand.
Under Downtown Prague.
Diving into History.
When Giants Roamed the Earth.
Temple of the Sun.
Where Was Jesus Born?
Homeless Collections.
Return to Cyrene.
The Anglo-Saxon Prince.
A Place Without History.
Integrating the Frontier.
Tribal Challenges.
RACE, SELF-CONTROL, AND DRUG PROBLEMS AMONG JAIL INMATES.
EXAMINING THE IMPACT OF INDIVIDUAL, COMMUNITY, AND MARKET FACTORS ON METHAMPHETAMINE USE: A TALE OF TWO CITIES.
ASIAN AMERICAN YOUTH, THE DANCE SCENE, AND CLUB DRUGS.
RISKS OF ARREST ACROSS DRUG MARKETS: A CAPTURE-RECAPTURE ANALYSIS OF "HIDDEN" DEALER AND USER POPULATIONS.
ARE YOU POSITIVE? THE RELATIONSHIP OF MINORITY COMPOSITION TO WORKPLACE DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING.
THEY DO THINGS DIFFERENTLY OVER THERE: DOCTORS, DRUGS, AND THE "BRITISH SYSTEM" OF TREATING OPIATE ADDICTION.
SUBSTANCE ABUSE DISORDERS AMONG HOMELESS AND RUNAWAY ADOLESCENTS.
WHITE CHICKS ON DOPE: HEROIN AND IDENTITY DYNAMICS IN NEW YORK IN THE 1990S.
MEXICAN AMERICAN YOUTH AND ADULT PRISON GANGS IN A CHANGING HEROIN MARKET.
THE RELATIVE CONTRIBUTIONS OF PARENTAL AND SIBLING SUBSTANCE USE TO ADOLESCENT TOBACCO, ALCOHOL, AND OTHER DRUG USE.
URINE COLLECTION JARS VERSUS VIDEO GAMES: PERCEPTIONS OF THREE STAKEHOLDER GROUPS TOWARD DRUG AND IMPAIRMENT TESTING PROGRAMS.
preface.
Constant Conversations: Agitators in the League of Women in Poland during the Stalinist Period.
State Feminism? Gender and Socialist State Formation in Maoist China.
Visualize Academic Labor in the 1990s: Inventing an Activist Archive in Santa Barbara.
White Trash: Manifesting the Bisexual.
Class Absences: Cutting Class in Feminist Studies.
Problems and Promise in Middle East and North Africa Gender Research.
preface.
Queens of Academe: Campus Pageantry and Student Life.
Beauvoir's Time/Our Time: The Renaissance in Simone de Beauvoir Studies.
The Art of Jehanne-Marie Gavarini.
Contesting Motherhood in the Age of AIDS: Maternal Ideology in the Debate over Mandatory HIV Testing.
Geographic Theorizations of Sexuality: A Review of Recent Works.
GEOGRAPHY AND THE MIDDLE EAST.
THE GEOGRAPHICAL DIMENSIONS OF AL-QA'IDA RHETORIC.
(ANTI)SOCIAL CAPITAL IN THE PRODUCTION OF AN (UN)CIVIL SOCIETY IN PAKISTAN.
GLOBALIZATION AND EXTERRITORIALITY IN METROPOLITAN CAIRO.
OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM: A MILITARY GEOGRAPHICAL PERSPECTIVE.
ALEXANDER THE GREAT'S MOUNTAIN.
GREAT BASIN IMAGERY IN NEWSPAPER COVERAGE OF YUCCA MOUNTAIN.
WHEN THE LIGHTS GO OUT IN CHESHIRE.
MESSAGE IN THE PLAZA: LANDSCAPE, LANDSCAPING, AND FOREST DISCOURSE IN HONDURAS.
THE LOS ANGELES COAST AS A PUBLIC PLACE.
CLARET AND COUSCOUS: THE SYMBOLIC TOWNSCAPE OF A MOROCCAN MOUNTAIN RESORT.
Associations of Psychosocial Factors with the Stress of Infertility Treatment.
Avoidance Coping and HIV Risk Behavior among Gay Men.
Contribution of Demographic, Medical, and Social Support Variables in Predicting the Mental Health Dimension of Quality of Life among People with Multiple Sclerosis.
Increasing Access to Health Care: Examination of Hospital Community Benefits and Free Care Programs.
Advancing Social Workers' Responsiveness to Health Disparities: The Case of Breast Cancer Screening.
Drug Courts and Mental Health Courts: Implications for Social Work.
Utilization of Health Social Work Services by Older Immigrants and Veterans in Israel.
The Capacity of a Mentally Challenged Person to Consent to Abortion and Sterilization.
Helping Adults with Diabetes: A Review of Evidence-Based Interventions.
Social Work Admission Assessment Tool for Identifying Patients in Need of Comprehensive Social Work Evaluation.
Ethical Considerations in Prenatal Sex Selection.
Examining Variables Related to Successful Collaboration on the Hospice Team.
Grief Reactions and Depression in Caregivers of Individuals with Alzheimer's Disease: Results from a Pilot Study in an Urban Setting.
Offering African Americans Opportunities to Participate in Clinical Trials Research: How Social Workers Can Help.
How Many Social Workers Are Needed in Primary Care? A Patient-Based Needs Assessment Example.
Developing a Spiritual Assessment Toolbox: A Discussion of the Strengths and Limitations of Five Different Assessment Methods.
Anaphylaxis: How Do You Live with It?
Listening for the Communicative Signals of Humor, Narratives, and Self-Disclosure in the Family Caregiver Interview.
Social Work Leadership and Aging: Meeting the Demographic Imperative.
From Scholarship to Policy.
Making Healthy Behavior Easy.
Material World: Electrospinning.
2003-2004 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COLLEGE OF HUMAN ECOLOGY. (cover story)
Ceci Shapes Judicial Policy on Testimony of Children.
Students Become Facility Strategists in Simulations with Real Companies.
Project Chronicles Pharmaceutical and Tobacco Advertising in Magazines.
Enlightened Policies Can Benefit the Poor and Hungry.
The Economics of Obesity: Costs, Causes, and Controls.
Design as a Tool for Leadership and Social Change.
Iron Plays a Major Role in Nutrition.
Archive Provides Scholars with Data on Child Abuse.
Studying the Effects of Health Insurance Regulation on Workers and Employers.
Preparing Students to Work with Troubled Children.
Effective Reinforcement Techniques in Elementary Physical Education: The Key to Behavior Management.
Improving Socialization Through Sport: An Analytic Review of Literature on Aggression and Sportsmanship.
Elementary Physical Education Student Teachers' Interactions with Students.
An Examination of Skill Learning Using Direct Instruction.
Influence of Activity Mode on Feeling States of High School Physical Education Students.
Preservice Teachers' Field Experience Surprises: Some Things Never Change.
Should Marching Band be Allowed to Replace Physical Education Credits: An Analysis.
Comparative Advantage: An Economics Lesson in Collaboration for Teachers and Coaches.
The Influence of Experience on Pre-service Teachers' Perceptions of Good and Bad Aspects of a Lesson.
What Elementary Physical Education Student Teachers Observe and Reflect Upon to Assist Their Instruction.
Perceptions of Assessment in Elementary Physical Education: A Case Study.
Physical Description and Job Attainment in Physical Education.
Relational Demography in Coaching Dyads.
What Do Children Most Enjoy about Summer Soccer Camp? Gender and Group Perceptions.
The Effect of a Female Physical Educator's Physical Appearance on Physical Fitness Knowledge and Attitudes of Junior High Students.
Student Voices--What Middle and High School Students Have to Say about Physical Education.
Successful When Given the Opportunity: Investigating Gender Representation and Success Rates of Interscholastic Athletic Directors.
A Comparison of 9th Grade Male and Female Physical Education Activities Preferences and Support for Coeducational Groupings.
Influence of a Physical Education Methods Course on Elementary Education Majors' Knowledge of Fundamental Movement Skills.
Which "Character" Should Sport Develop?
Evidence-Based Practice in Kinesiology: The Theory to Practice Gap Revisited.
Practice Setting Modification and Skill Acquisition.
Learning to Coach through Experience: Conditions that Influence Reflection.
Physical Education Teachers' Reflections on Preparation for Inclusion.
Russia, the sick man of Europe.
What do women really want?
The age of depression.
Phantom jobs and job losses.
The working-poverty trap.
Up from the bottom rung.
Gotham's fiscal crisis: lessons unlearned.
Why we study Western Civ.
The Impact of Sexual Arousal on Sexual Risk-Taking: A Qualitative Study.
Condom Use, Frequency of Sex, and Number of Partners: Multidimensional Characterization of Adolescent Sexual Risk-Taking.
Feeling Frumpy: The Relationships Between Body Image and Sexual Response Changes in Midlife Women.
Risky Sexual Behavior in Low-Income African American Women: The Impact of Sexual Health Variables.
Differences in Psychological Health and Family Dysfunction by Sexual Victimization Type in a Clinical Sample of African American Adolescent Women.
The Objectification of Women in Mainstream Pornographic Videos in Australia.
A Comparison of African American and White College Students' Affective and Attitudinal Reactions to Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Individuals: An Exploratory Study.
Gender Attitudes, Sexual Violence, and HIV/AIDS Risks Among Men and Women in Cape Town, South Africa.
Contentious Issues in Research on Trafficked Women Working in the Sex Industry: Study Design, Ethics, and Methodology.
Internet Sexuality Research with Rural Men Who Have Sex with Men: Can We Recruit and Retain Them?
Cycles of Shame: Menstrual Shame, Body Shame, and Sexual Decision-Making.
An Examination of Sexual Strategies Used by Urban Southern and Rural Midwestern University Women.
Typing, Doing, and Being: Sexuality and the Internet.
An Empirical Study of Ordinal Condom Use Measures.
Sexual Place, Spatial Change, and the Social Reorganization of Sexual Culture.
KLEPTOCRACY: CURSE OF DEVELOPMENT.
BOOM OR BUST? CASINO GAMING AND HOST MUNICIPALITIES.
THE UNITED STATES AND THE ARAB-ISRAELI CONFLICT: (UN)FORGING FUTURE PEACE.
POLICY POINT-COUNTERPOINT: SOCIAL SECURITY REFORM.
POINT: THE CASE FOR SOCIAL SECURITY REFORM.
COUNTERPOINT: THE CASE AGAINST SOCIAL SECURITY REFORM.
A SUPERIOR COLORED MAN…AND A SCOTCH WOMAN: INTERRACIAL MARRIAGES IN NEW YORK CITY, 1850-1870.
THINKING THE WORLD: A COMMENT ON PHILOSOPHY OF HISTORY AND GLOBALIZTION STUDIES.
PURCHASING THE CANADIAN TEENAGE IDENTITY: ICTS, AMERICAN MEDIA, AND BRAND-NAME CONSUMPTION.
POLICY POINT-COUNTERPOINT: IS WESTPHALIA HISTORY?
POINT: THE WESTPHALIA LEGACY AND THE MODERN NATION-STATE.
COUNTERPOINT: THE WESTPHALIA OVERSTATEMENT.
Female Athletes' Perceptions of Parental Influences.
The Relation Between Sport Orientations and Athletic Identity Among Adolescent Girl and Boy Athletes.
Sociability and Excitement Motives of Spectators Attending Entertainment Sport Events: Spectators of Soccer and Ski-jumping.
Factors, Differential Market Effects, and Marketing Strategies in the Renewal of Season Tickets for Intercollegiate Football Games.
Motivational Climate and Goal Orientation in Adolescent Female Softball Players.
Great Expectations: How Do Athletes Of Different Expectancies Attribute Their Perception Of Personal Athletic Performance?
Influences of Perfectionism on Motor Performance, Affect, and Causal Attributions in Response to Critical Information Feedback.
A Comparison of Physiological and Psychological Indicators in the Evaluation of the Work Capacity of Snowboarders.
The Effectiveness of a Self-Efficacy Intervention for Helping Adolescents Cope with Sport-Competition Loss.
Visual Cues and Information Used to Anticipate Tennis Ball Shot and Placement.
The Benefits of and Barriers to Strength Training Among College-age Women.
Identity Structure, Role Discrepancy and Psychological Adjustment in Male College Student-Athletes.
Gender, Age, and Professional-Level Differences in the Psychological Correlates of Fear of Injury in Italian Gymnasts.
Coaching Confidence: An Exploratory Investigation of Sources and Gender Differences.
Catastrophizing and Pain Perception in Recreational Ballet Dancers.
The Interaction of Goal Orientation and Stage of Change on Exercise Behavior in College Students.
A Comparison of Test-Retest Reliabilities Using the Self-Talk Use Questionnaire.
Female Athletes' Perceptions of Head Coaches' Communication Competence.
The Geography of Visitor Attendance at College Football Games.
The Accuracy, Agreement and Coherence of Decision-Making in Rugby Union Officials.
Achievement Goal Orientations in Competition Dog Obedience Participants.
The Effects of Team Identification and Game Outcome on Willingness to Consider Anonymous Acts of Hostile Aggression.
DISPLACED PEOPLE, DISPLACED ENERGY, AND DISPLACED MEMORIES: THE CASE OF CAHORA BASSA, 1970-2004.
IMPRISONMENT AND COLONIALISM IN KENYA, c.1930-1952: ESCAPING THE CARCERAL ARCHIPELAGO.
THAT PLACE WAS WONDERFUL! AFRICAN TENANTS ON RHODESDALE ESTATE, COLONIAL ZIMBABWE, c. 1900-1952.
PIRATES, SLAVERS, AND THE INDIGENOUS POPULATION IN MADAGASCAR, c. 1690-1715.
GRANDFATHERS, GRANDSONS, MORALITY, AND RADICAL POLITICS IN LATE COLONIAL BUGANDA.
PASSENGERS, PARTNERSHIPS, AND PROMISSORY NOTES: GUJARATI TRADERS IN COLONIAL NATAL, 1870-1920.
DEMOCRATIZING CINEMA AND CENSORSHIP IN TANZANIA, 1920-1980.
MAKING POVERTY HISTORY.
Celebrating the Indian Way of Life.
A Museum of the Indian, Not for the Indian.
TO FLEE FROM ALL LANGUAGES: THE GAP BETWEEN LANGUAGE AND EXPERIENCE IN THE WORKS OF MODERN ARAB POETS.
CONFLICTING ACCOUNTS ON THE FEAR OF STRANGERS: MUSLIM AND ARAB PERCEPTIONS OF EUROPEANS IN MEDIEVAL GEOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE.
INTERNAL VIOLENCE: STATE'S ROLE AND SOCIETY'S RESPONSES.
THE MUSLIM WORLD AND THE WEST: THE ROOTS OF CONFLICT.
WAR AND FORCED MIGRATION IN EGYPT: THE EXPERIENCE OF EVACUATION FROM THE SUEZ CANAL CITIES (1967-1976).
A TALE OF TWO REGIONS: REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH IN THE CARIBBEAN AND THE GULF.
ORIGINS AND PATTERNS IN THE DISCOURSE OF NEW ARAB CINEMA.
POLITICAL CONDITIONALITY OF ECONOMIC RELATIONS BETWEEN PATERNALIST STATES: TURKEY'S INTERACTION WITH IRAN, IRAQ, AND SYRIA.
THE TURKISH MODEL AND DEMOCRATIZATION IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
UNDERSTANDING THE ATTITUDES OF ARABS TOWARD "AMERICA": THE UNDERUTILIZATION OF CLASS.
Leadership Matters: International Treaty Ratification in Canada and the United States.
Canada-US. Free Trade and Price Convergence in North America.
Situating Canada: The Shifting Perspective of the Postcolonial Other in Margaret Atwood's The Robber Bride.
From Trusted Ally to Suspicious Neighbor: Canada-US. Relations in a Changing Global Environment.
Quill and Canon: Writing the Great War in Canada.
Work "Only a Woman Can Do": The Women's Division of the Canadian Department of Immigration and Colonization, 1920-1937.
State Sponsorship and Community Environmental Groups: The Atlantic Coastal Action Program in Newfoundland.
Canadian Editorial Opinion and the 1963 Nuclear Weapon Acquisition Debate.
The Ties that Bind: Transnational Migrant Networks at the Canadian-U.S. Borderland.
The Debate on Family Reunification and Canada's Immigration Act of 1976.
The Next Pandemic?
Preparing for the Next Pandemic.
How to Help Poor Countries.
Addressing State Failure.
A Partnership for Central Asia.
The Human-Animal Link.
The Lessons of HIV/AIDS.
Regime Change and Its Limits.
Giving Justice Its Due.
A Trade War with China?
Antidumping: The Third Rail of Trade Policy.
Europe's Angry Muslims.
Blowback Revisited.
Who Will Control the Internet?
Independence for Kosovo.
Iraq and the Democratic Peace.
The Ethical Economist.
China's "Peaceful Rise" to Great-Power Status.
China's Global Hunt for Energy.
China's Search for Stability With America.
Understanding China.
Can Democracy Stop Terrorism?
Development and Democracy.
How to Win in Iraq.
Taming American Power.
Nepal at the Precipice.
How to Rebuild Africa.
Which Broadband Nation?
Poll Positions.
Brazilian Democracy at Twenty.
A New Era for Brazil's Economy?
Rethinking Foreign Investment.
Facing the Past.
Learning with Brazil and Lula.
STITCHES AS SUTURES.
NARRATING TRAUMA AS MODERNITY.
ICONIC AUTOPSY.
WITNESSING TRAUMA IN POST-APARTHEID SOUTH AFRICA.
Invisible Again.
TRAUMA, TESTIMONY, AND TRUTH.
Senses in Understandings of Art.
Archaeopolitics and Postage Stamps in Africa.
African Art at the Museum für Völkerkunde in Vienna. (cover story)
New Directions in African Art(s).
Whither African Art?
The Merina Landscape in Early Nineteenth Century Highlands Madagascar.
Symptoms and Strangeness in Yorùbá Anti-aesthetics.
Layers of Awareness.
Challenges to Rural Festivals with the Return to Democratic Rule in Southeastern Nigeria.
Masques Dogons in a Challenging World.
Redefining Twentieth Century African Art.
The Historical Life of Objects.
Notes on African Art, History, and Diasporas Within.
current events.
As Excrement to Sacrament: The Dissimulated Pagan Idol of Ste-Marie d'Oloron.
Fount of Mercy, City of Blood: Cultic Anti-Judaism and the Pulkau Passion Altarpiece.
Myth and the New Science: Vico, Tiepolo, and the Language of the Optimates.
Everyday Life in Motion: The Art of Walking in Late-Nineteenth-Century Paris.
Nihonga Meets Gu Kaizhi: A Japanese Copy of a Chinese Painting in the British Museum.
Interventions: Toward a New Model of Renaissance Anachronism.
The Infinite Variety of Listening Logs: Your Students May Astound You.
Fostering Revision and Extension in Student Composing.
So, Why Sol-Mi?
Children's Literature in the Music Classroom: Finding the Music Within.
Building Your Instrumental Music Program in an Urban School.
Piece by Piece: The Story of the Central Bands Commissioning Project.
Challenges to Music Education: Curriculum Reconceptualized. (cover story)
Planning for Understanding: A Reconceptualized View of the Music Curriculum. (cover story)
The Music Curriculum as Lived Experience: Children's "Natural" Music-Learning Processes. (cover story)
Colliding Perspectives? Music Curriculum as Cultural Studies. (cover story)
Whose Music? Music Education and Cultural Issues. (cover story)
Answering NASM's Challenge: Are We All Pulling Together?
Enriching the Ensemble Experience for Students with Visual Impairments.
Teaching Music to Special Learners: Children with Disruptive Behavior Disorders.
Enhanced Student Learning through Cross-Disciplinary Projects.
Exploring a Community's Heritage through a Collaborative Unit of Study.
Children's Natural and Necessary Musical Play: Global Contexts, Local Applications.
Shaping Expressive Performance: A Problem-Solving Approach.
Music Education in Rural Areas: A Few Keys to Success.
Distance Learning and the Music Teacher.
Performing Arts Medicine and Music Education: What Do We Really Need to Know?
New Music: How Music Educators Can Save An Endangered Species.
Measuring Student Achievement in the Future Based on Lessons from the Past: the NAEP Arts Assessment.
Modern Mentoring: Ancient Lessons for Today.
Deep Listening to the Musical World.
Avenues of Entry into the World of Western Art Music.
The Performance Pyramid: Building Blocks for a Successful Choral Performance.
Improvisation Begins with Exploration.
Toward an Effective Pedagogy for Teaching Rhythm: Gordon and Beyond.
Transforming Classroom Music Instruction with Ideas from Critical Pedagogy.
From The Neutral: Session of March 11, 1978.
On Duchamp.
Leiris/Nerval: A Few File Cards.
Introduction.
Language Between Performance and Photography.
Second City: Ed Ruscha and the Reception of Los Angeles Pop.
Thermometers Should Last Forever.
Ed Ruscha and the Language That He Used.
Something Else: Ed Ruscha's Photographic Books.
Ed Ruscha's One-Way Street.
The Poetics of Interruption in Mark Twain's Roughing It.
Transitivity, Indirection, and Redemption in Sheila Watson's The Double Hook.
Abstracts.
Structural Secrets: Shakespeare's Complex Chiasmus.
When Chaos Is Come Again: Narrative and Narrative Analysis in Othello.
The Trappings of All's Well That Ends Well.
Shakespeare's "Still-Vexed" Tempest.
Spenser out of His Stanza.
Extemporaneous Blending: Conceptual Integration in Humorous Discourse from Talk Radio.
Repetition in Free Indirect Style: A Dialogue of Minds?
Hiatus of Subject and Verb in Poetic Language.
How Stylisticians Draw on Narratology: Approaches, Advantages and Disadvantages.
The Uncertainties of Conversational Exchange: Dialogue Monitoring as a Function of the Narrative Voice.
The Gentleman in the White Waistcoat: Dickens and Metonymy.
Intermental Thought in the Novel: The Middlemarch Mind.
Pre-Facing Simile Vehicles in Dante Gabriel Rossetti's Sonnets.
Chandler's American Style.
Hegemonic Registers in Momaday's House Made of Dawn.
the TOP 10 in TECH. (cover story)
TAKING CONTROL.
Battle of the EXPERT.
FEELING A CHILL.
ABA Law School Accreditation Site Evaluation Visits 2004-2005.
LAW TECH GENERATIONS.
Novel Ideas. (cover story)
the Good Fight gets HARDER.
Dream Home Nightmares.
Brave, New World of Partnership.
The Education of Larry Lessig.
MJP Picks Up Steam.
WHO Is The Client?
FACING THE VICTIMS.
Casting FOR CLIENTS. (cover story)
Children Without a Country.
Great ARGUMENTS.
Opening Sentences.
ABA TREASURER'S REPORT 2003-2004.
SCIENCE EXPERIMENT.
Editors' Foreword.
THE SENATE SHOULD GIVE IMMEDIATE ADVICE AND CONSENT TO THE UN CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF THE SEA: WHY THE CRITICS ARE WRONG.
DON'T RESURRECT THE LAW OF THE SEA TREATY.
MINERAL RESOURCES OF STATELESS SPACE: LESSONS FROM THE DEEP SEABED.
OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS RESOURCES: ECONOMICS, POLITICS AND THE RULE OF LAW IN THE NIGERIA-SÃO TOMÉ E PRÍNCIPE JOINT DEVELOPMENT ZONE.
ENHANCING MARITIME SECURITY IN THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORE.
SEEKING EFFECTIVENESS FOR THE CRACKDOWN OF PIRACY AT SEA.
UNDERSTANDING MARITIME JURISDICTIONAL DISPUTES: THE EAST CHINA SEA AND BEYOND.
SEA TRADE AND SECURITY: AN ASSESSMENT OF THE POST-9/11 REACTION.
CONTRIBUTING TO OCEAN SECURITY: GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY SUPPORT FOR INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT OF LAND-SEA INTERACTIONS.
TITANIC STATES? IMPACTS AND RESPONSES TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE PACIFIC ISLANDS.
ARE HIGH SEAS AND INTERNATIONAL MARINE FISHERIES THE ULTIMATE SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT CHALLENGE?
WHO IS RESPONSIBLE FOR MARINE DEBRIS? THE INTERNATIONAL POLITICS OF CLEANING OUR OCEANS.
THE ECOLOGY OF GLOBAL ECONOMIC POWER: CHANGING INVESTMENT PRACTICES TO PROMOTE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY.
PAYING FOR PROSPERITY: HOW AND WHY TO INVEST IN AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA.
BUILDING INCLUSIVE FINANCIAL SECTORS: THE ROAD TO GROWTH AND POVERTY REDUCTION.
THE NATURE AND IMPORTANCE OF LIBERTY.
FREEDOM.
NOT NECESSARILY IN CONFLICT: AMERICANS CAN BE BOTH UNITED AND CULTURALLY DIVERSE.
THE HUMAN NATURE OF FREEDOM AND IDENTITY--WE HOLD MORE THAN RANDOM THOUGHTS.
FIVE THESES ON IDENTITY POLITICS.
NEWS FOR THE LIBERTARIANS: THE MORAL TRADITION ALREADY CONTAINS THE LIBERTARIAN PREMISES.
SAFETY AND FREEDOM: COMMON CONCERNS FOR CONSERVATIVES, LIBERTARIANS, AND CIVIL LIBERTARIANS.
THE VIRTUES OF PREEMPTIVE DETERRENCE.
TOWARD THE FRAMERS' UNDERSTANDING OF "ADVICE AND CONSENT": A HISTORICAL AND TEXTUAL INQUIRY.
ENDING THE WAR ON TERRORISM ONE TERRORIST AT A TIME: A NONCRIMINAL DETENTION MODEL FOR HOLDING AND RELEASING GUANTANAMO BAY DETAINEES.
USING INFORMATION MARKETS TO IMPROVE PUBLIC DECISION MAKING.
Continuing Education for Nurses: A Problem-Oriented System.
Spiritual Mirroring: a Concept and an Experience.
Potential applications of the da Vinci minimally invasive surgical robotic system in otolaryngology.
Tuberculous otitis media: Report of 2 cases on Long Island, N.Y., and a review of all cases reported in the United States from 1990 through 2003.
Cochlear implantation in severe traumatic brain injury and paranoid schizophrenia: Two case studies.
Total necrosis of the intranasal structures and soft palate as a result of nasal inhalation of crushed OxyContin.
Preservation of the superficial lobe for deep-lobe parotid tumors: A better aesthetic outcome.
Preoperative computed tomography may fail to detect patients at risk for perilymph gusher.
Intraoperative use of mitomycin C in fibrous atresia of the external auditory canal.
Rhabdomyosarcoma of the middle ear and mastoid: A case report and review of the literature.
Bilateral peritonsillar abscess revisited.
Polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma at the base of the tongue: An unusual location.
Pneumosinus dilatans frontalis: A case report.
The effect of stapedotomy on tinnitus in patients with otospongiosis.
Tympanostomy tubes for otitis media: Quality-of-life improvement for children and parents.
Comparison of intranasal hypertonic Dead Sea saline spray and intranasal aqueous triamcinolone spray in seasonal allergic rhinitis.
Brown tumor of the facial bones: Case report and literature review.
Rhabdomyoma of the larynx: Case report and clinical and pathologic review.
Advantages of perforator flaps in reconstruction of complex defects of the head and neck.
Pitfalls in imaging: Differentiating intravagal and carotid body paragangliomas.
Ossicular chain dislocation with normal hearing.
Recurrent polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma manifesting as a sinonasal mass: A case report.
Macroglossia secondary to systemic amyloidosis: Case report and literature review.
Spindle-cell hemangioendothelioma of the posterior pharyngeal wall.
Peritonsillar abscess: A comparison of outpatient IM clindamycin and inpatient IV ampicillin/sulbactam following needle aspiration.
Xanthogranulomatous sialadenitis: A case report and literature review.
Diagnostic accuracy of palpation-guided and image-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the thyroid.
Angiolipoma of the neck: A case report.
Electrophysiologic laryngeal nerve monitoring in high-risk thyroid surgery.
Auditory steady-state response audiometry in profound SNHL: The impact of abnormal middle ear function.
Simultaneous contralateral vestibular schwannoma and glomus jugulare tumor: A case report.
Endoscopic ligation of the sphenopalatine artery as a primary management of severe posterior epistaxis in patients with coagulopathy.
Spontaneous transtemporal CSF leakage: A study of 51 cases.
Poststapedectomy hearing gain: Comparison of a Teflon (fluoroplastic ASTM F 754) prosthesis with a Schuknecht-type wire/Teflon prosthesis.
Primary carcinosarcoma of the helix of the ear.
Supernumerary nostril with congenital cataract.
Extramedullary plasmacytoma arising from the nasal septum.
Myxolipoma of the epiglottis in an adult: A case report.
Schwannoma of the larynx: A case report.
Definitions of otologic diseases and recommended study designs.
Ecologic impact of broad-spectrum quinolones.
Safety and efficacy of topical quinolones.
Safety and efficacy of topical steroids with and without topical antibiotics.
A study of prognostic factors in sudden hearing loss.
Nonsurgical home treatment of middle ear effusion and associated hearing loss in children. Part II: Validation study.
Adenoid cystic carcinoma of the salivary glands: A 20-year review with long-term follow-up.
Nonsurgical home treatment of middle ear effusion and associated hearing loss in children. Part I: Clinical trial.
Vertigo and motion sickness. Part I: Vestibular anatomy and physiology.
Endoscopic resection of a venous hemangioma of the optic nerve sheath.
Primary chordoma of the lateral nasal wall: Case report and review.
Acinic cell carcinoma of the parotid gland: A 15-year review limited to a single surgeon at a single institution.
Protecting Public Health in the Age of Bioterrorism Surveillance: Is the Price Right?
Lessons from a Primary-Prevention Program for Lead Poisoning Among Inner-City Children.
Faculty Internships in Environmental Health: Planning and Implementation.
The Antibacterial Action of Cloths and Sanitizers and the Use of Environmental Alternatives in Food Industries.
Environmental Health and the Media, Part 2: Beyond Get the Message Out/Put the Fires Out.
Creating Effective Messages About Environmental Health. (cover story)
The Effectiveness of Education as a Tool to Manage Onsite Septic Systems.
Determining the Source of Fecal Contamination in Recreational Waters.
Behavior of Listeria monocytogenes in pH-Modified Chicken Salad During Refrigerated Storage.
West Nile Virus: Legal Responses That Further Environmental Health.
Water Safety and Disaster Management Procedures Reported by Louisiana Health Care Food Service Directors.
Clearing the Air: A Model for Investigating Indoor Air Quality in Texas Schools.
Health Professionals Hold Positive Attitudes Toward Biotechnology and Genetically Engineered Foods.
Shirt Designs for Sun Protection.
Training in Outbreak Investigation Through Use of an Online Discussion Group.
Unplanned Releases and Injuries Associated with Aerial Application of Chemicals. 1995-2002.
The Use of a GIS to Compare the Land Areas Captured by Very Basic and Complex Wellhead Protection Area Models.
Environmental and Health Impacts of Household Solid Waste Handling and Disposal Practices in Third World Cities: The Case of the Accra Metropolitan Area, Ghana.
Environmental Health and the Media, Part 1: Overcoming Shark Phobias. (cover story)
Water Availability and Usage on the New Mexico/Mexico Border.
Assessing the Effectiveness of Food Worker Training in Florida: Opportunities and Challenges.
Food Safety Issues and Training Methods for Ready-to-Eat Foods in the Grocery Industry.
A New Alternative for Sizing Septic Systems.
Prevalence of Elevated Blood Lead Levels and Evaluation of a Lead-Risk-Screening Questionnaire in Rural Minnesota. (cover story)
The Influence of Well Construction on Bacterial Contamination of Private Water Wells in Pennsylvania.
Reducing Bioaerosol Dispersion from Wastewater Treatment and Its Land Application: A Review and Analysis.
Reducing Microorganism Concentrations in Wastewater with Submerged Aeration as a Primary Treatment Method.
Nitrogen Dioxide Increases Cardiorespiratory Admissions in Torrelavega (Spain).
A Nurse Transition Program for Orthopaedics.
An Exploration of Recurrent Injury Prevention in Patients With Trauma.
Energy Healing.
Use of Bisphosphonates in a Case of Perthes Disease.
Indices of Leukocyte Infiltration and Muscle Recovery After Eccentric Contraction-Induced Injury in Young and Adult Male Mice.
Emerging Pathogens and Revisited Prevention Strategies for the Clinical Environment.
Functional Status, Personal Health, and Self-Esteem of Caregivers of Children in a Body Cast.
Spinal Surgery Patient Care.
Rhabdomyolysis.
Anterior Cruciate Ligament Injuries of the Knee.
The Newborn Foot.
Multiple Organ Dysfunction Syndrome After Multiple Trauma.
Health-Related Stressors Experienced by Patients Who Underwent Total Knee Replacement Seven Days After Being Discharged Home.
The Evolution of Orthopaedic Nursing at the Hospital for Special Surgery.
Multicenter Pin Care Study.
Treatment Options for Articular Cartilage Defects of the Knee.
Do Your Patients Understand?
Fighting Infection.
Teaching the N-Word.
The Rise and Fall of David Duke.
Performance.
Socrates' Mistake.
A Standard Oil Childhood.
The Big Roundup.
The Salome Factor.
A Few Good Buildings.
Miller's Tale.
Leading Men.
The Coming of the French.
The Software Wars.
The Crooner and the Physicist.
A Sturdy Man.
beyond the bird unit.
from theory to practice: a new teacher-librarian tackles library assessment.
the Internet and student research: teaching critical evaluation skills.
boys are people too: boys and reading, truth and misconceptions.
digital scrapbooking.
reading lifelong literacy links into the school library.
working smarter: being strategic about assessment and accountability.
how one child learns: the teacher-librarian as evidence-based practitioner.
Jonathan Edwards, Enthusiast? Radical Revivalism and the Great Awakening in the Connecticut Valley.
Of Locustae and Dangerous Men: Peter Damian, the Vallombrosans, and Eleventh-century Reform.
Mary or Michael? Saint-Switching, Gender, and Sanctity in a Medieval Miracle of Childbirth.
The Nineteenth-Century Bible Wars and the Separation of Church and State.
RETURN OF THE TEXT, OR THE END OF LATE ANCIENT CHRISTIANITY?
RESPONSE TO COMMENTS ON HISTORY, THEORY, TEXT.
Our Lord God's Chancery in Magdeburg and Its Fight against the Interim.
Boundlessness, Consolidation, and Discontinuity between Generations: Catholic Seminary Studies in Antebellum America.
Visions of Self, Success, and Society among Young Men in Antebellum Boston.
How the United States REVERSED Its Policy on Bombing Civilians. (cover story)
After Fifty Years, Do we Remember Our Humanity?
From Watergate to Downing Street: Lying for War.
Sunset can be Glorious.
The Forgotten Heroes of a Greater Generation. (cover story)
The Russell-Einstein Manifesto.
RIO DE JANEIRO: Microcosm of the Future.
Ripples Moving Outward: The Human Impacts of War.
How I Failed the Religious Test for Public Office.
The War at Home: Forgotten Events in the Civil Rights Movement.
Is Nature Cruel?
Goodbye, Mr. Fitz.
Why Ten Commandments Displays on Governmental Property Are Unconstitutional.
The Roman Catholic Hierarchy: Putting the Squeeze on Politicians. (cover story)
The Heart of Q'eqchi' Culture.
IRAQ WITHDRAWAL AND MOVEON.ORG.
Truth, Death, and Journalism: We Kill Journalists, Don't We?
Graffiti of a Nicaraguan Survivor.
RFID Report.
Teaching Humanities in New Ways--and Teaching New Humanities.
Can Peace Be Taught-- and Learned?
Will All of Him Be at the Funeral?
Are Nonreligious Teenagers Really Deficient?
AMERICA'S TRADITIONAL VALUES THE CONSCIENCE OF A NATION.
Ends and Means.
A Critique of Faith-based Prison Programs.
UP THE RIVER.
ABUSE, RACISM, TORTURE, SAVAGERY Hollywood Pictures the Dark Side of American Prisons.
Criminal Behavior and the Ethics of Biological Intervention.
Prevalence of Procrastination in the United States, United Kingdom, and Australia: Arousal and Avoidance Delays among Adults.
Gender and Study Behavior: How Social Perception, Social Norm Adherence, and Structured Academic Behavior are Predicted by Gender.
Attachment Style and Decoding of Nonverbal Cues.
The Development of the Experiences of Low Mood and Depression Questionnaire.
State Laws on Suicide and Rates of Suicide: A Replication.
Worry and its Relationship to Shyness.
Sex Differences in Jealousy in Response to a Partner's Imagined Sexual or Emotional Infidelity with a Same or Different Race Other.
Personality and Attitude Toward Christianity Among Church Musicians.
An Integrative Model for the Study of Psychological Distress in Vietnamese-American Adolescents.
Development of a Shortened Form of the Coping Responses Inventory-Youth with an Australian Sample.
A New Approach to the Study of Deception in Organizations.
The Influence of Font Type on Information Recall.
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome and Myalgic Encephalomyletis: Are Both Conditions on the Same Continuum?
Interpersonal and Personality Dimensions of Behavior: FIRO-B and the Big Five.
Affluence Cues and Perceptions of Helping.
Are Celebrity-worshippers More Prone to Narcissism? A Brief Report.
Communication Apprehension and Cultural Context: A Comparison of Communication Apprehension in Japanese and American Students.
How Dream Recall Frequency Shapes People's Beliefs About the Content of Their Dreams.
Calcium Knowledge, Dietary Calcium Intake, and Bone Mineral Content and Density in Young Women.
Perceptions of Non-Local Communication: Incidences Associated with Media Consumption and Individual Differences.
The Responses of Male and Female Managers to Workplace Stress and Downsizing.
Failure and Success in Foster Care Programs.
An Experimental Comparison of Conventional and Web-based Instructional Formats.
Farewell from the Editor's Desk.
CHRISTIAN SALVATION: BIBLICAL AND THEOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES.
BODILY RESURRECTION AND THE DIALECTIC OF SPIRIT AND MATTER.
VALUING EARTH INTRINSICALLY AND INSTRUMENTALLY: A THEOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS.
A DIALECTIC ENGAGEMENT WITH THE SOCIAL SCIENCES IN AN ECCLESIOLOGICAL CONTEXT.
GHISLAIN LAFONT AND CONTEMPORARY SACRAMENTAL THEOLOGY.
GENETIC ANOMALY OR GENETIC DIVERSITY: THINKING IN THE KEY OF DISABILITY ON THE HUMAN GENOME.
Bernard Lonergan at the Service of the Church.
FEMINIST MARIOLOGIES: HETERONOMY/ SUBORDINATION AND THE SCANDAL OF CHRISTOLOGY.
U.S. CATHOLIC SOCIAL THOUGHT, GENDER, AND ECONOMIC LIVELIHOOD.
FAMILY AS DOMESTIC CHURCH: DEVELOPMENTAL TRAJECTORY, LEGITIMACY, AND PROBLEMS OF APPROPRIATION.
NEWMAN AND THEOLOGICAL LIBERALISM.
SEARCHING FOR JOSEF PIEPER.
Finding New Ways To Protect and Preserve Plant Genetic Resources. (cover story)
A SYLVAN SCENE IN APPALACHIA.
Fresh-Cut Fruit Moves Into the Fast Lane.
Conservation: Are We Getting Our Money's Worth?
The Hills Are Sagging.
Vegetable Breeding Steps Up to the Next Level.
ARS Continues Advances in Irradiation of Ready-To-Eat Foods.
An Agency Effort To Sequence Genomes. (cover story)
New Detection Methods Improve Food Safety.
Rooting for Gossypol.
Powerful Partnerships Fuel Research Advances.
Range That's a Home to Forage Research. (cover story)
Moving Away From Wheat/Fallow in the Great Plains.
Who's Who in the Nation's Largest Citrus Collection?
Settling Doubts About Livestock Stress. (cover story)
Researchers Study Microbial Threats to Shellfish Safety.
Viral Strike Team Always on Alert. (cover story)
Low Protein + Low Exercise = Sarcopenia.
Beetle Mania. (cover story)
International Partnership for Poultry Safety.
Pegging a Troublesome Change in Hydrilla.
Multicrop Rotation and Irrigation Study for Optimal Water Use in the Southeast.
Helping School~childeren Make the Grade in Nutrition.
Fields With a Mind of Their Own?
Underground Drainage.
ARS Partners With Defense Department To Protect Troops From Insect Vectors.
Chesapeake Bay Restoration: A Model of What?
The Scarlet Dye of the Holy Land.
Figs and the Diversity of Tropical Rainforests.
Ecology, Complexity, and Metaphor.
Ecosystems, Organisms, and Machines.
Self-organization and the Emergence of Complexity in Ecological Systems.
What Makes Life Tick: Taking Apart the Living Clock.
The Evolution and Development of Novel Traits, or How Beetles Got Their Horns.
Practicing Interdisciplinarity.
M ETA LAND: Characterizing Spatial Patterns and Statistical Context of Landscape Metrics.
Policy-driven versus Evidence- based Conservation: A Review of Political Targets and Biological Needs.
The Effect of Engaging Prior Learning on Student Attitudes toward Creationism and Evolution.
AIBS news.
Joint Ventures: A Different Approach to Conservation.
How Much Is Enough? The Recurrent Problem of Setting Measurable Objectives in Conservation.
Principles of the Atmospheric Pathway for Invasive Species Applied to Soybean Rust.
Ecology, Values, and Objectivity: Advancing the Debate.
Employment in the Life Sciences: A Mixed Outlook.
ABRUPT CHANGES.
Clearing the Air: How Delhi Broke the Logjam on Air Quality Reforms. (cover story)
Salmon Farms and Hatcheries.
FROM THE HEADWATERS TO THE SEA. (cover story)
Voices for Biodiversity Management in the 21st Century.
WHERE JUSTICE AND SUSTAINABILITY MEET.
Challenges for Environmental Studies.
ADVOCATING FOR THE ENVIRONMENT.
HOW GREEN IS NAFTA? (cover story)
More than Just Talk…Connecting Science and Decisionmaking.
Do Global Attitudes and Behaviors Support Sustainable Development?
EARTH SYSTEM ANALYSIS for SUSTAINABILITY. (cover story)
SMOG ALERT: THE CHALLENGES OF BATTLING OZONE POLLUTION.
CLIMATE AND TRADE.
SEEKING CITIZENS' VIEWS ON GM CROPS.
Embedded Audit Modules in Enterprise Resource Planning Systems: Implementation and Functionality.
Using Information Display Characteristics to Provide Decision Guidance in a Choice Task under Conditions of Strict Uncertainty.
The REA Pattern, Knowledge Structures, and Conceptual Modeling Performance.
Strategically Informed, Environmentally Conscious Information Requirements for Accounting Information Systems.
Inputting the Environment: Reconsidering the Environmental Information Matrix.
Behavioral Self-Regulation of Telework Locations: Interrupting Interruptions!
Discussion of Behavioral Self-Regulation of Telework Locations: Interrupting Interruptions!
A Service-Learning Course in Accounting Information Systems.
New York State Agencies: A Case Study for Analyzing the Process of Legacy System Migration: Part I.
Financial Reporting in XBRL on the SEC's EDGAR System: A Critique and Evaluation.
Bias Due to Visual Illusion in the Graphical Presentation of Accounting Information.
Financial Reporting and Auditing Agent with Net Knowledge (FRAANK) and extensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL).
THE NEW Engineering World. (cover story)
on-machine inspecting.
PUMPED UP.
ORGANIC DEVELOPMENTS.
Wheeling and Dealing.
THINKING Lean.
life, meet engineering.
Beyond Silicon.
Plowshares to Swords and Back.
new products.
WHERE THE ENGINEERS ARE.
Fast and Secure.
working backward.
Lighting the Countryside.
new products.
Making Sense of Change.
Experiment... Early and Often.
FLY the grayer skies. (cover story)
the success story.
THE DECIDING Factor.
THE END of the M.E.? (cover story)
PORTS LOOK FORWARD.
Soaring Twenties.
go between.
new products.
THE 2004-2005 ASME FELLOWS ….
Dip, Turn, and Dive.
DISRUPTIONS OR PROGRESS.
a short stroll.
Virtual Engineering. (cover story)
new products.
The Petroleum Bomb. (cover story)
RENEWABLE. RECHARGEABLE. REMARKABLE.
MADE YOUR WAY.
The Computer Assist.
FIRST IN MASS PRODUCTION.
EPHEMERAL WAREHOUSE. (cover story)
mighty mites.
VENTURING TO THE FAR REACHES.
Reach for the Sky.
new products.
Reading Between the Lines.
OBAFGKMLT.
Lagrangian Point or Bust!
sky events.
TEACHING ACROSS CULTURES.
The gravity of the situation. (cover story)
EINSTEIN GOES TO SCHOOL.
A Multinational History.
sky events.
The 2005 ASP Award Recipients.
PARI Where Science Excites the Imagination.
Cooking up the COSMOS. (cover story)
Learning to Own the Sky.
Volvelles!
sky eveNts.
RINGS of CREATION.
BUILDING BRIDGES TO DIVERSITY.
NATURE'S HURRICANE RECIPE.
PHASE TRANSITIONS & EXOTIC RELICS.
SKY EVENTS.
WHAT'S THE MATTER WITH ANITMATTER?
ASTRONOMER-GENERAL OF EARLY AMERICA.
THOUGHTS ON RECEIVING THE BRUCE MEDAL.
Three bright planets highlight the evening sky on the longest nights of the year.
FOLLOWING THE MARTAIN COASTLINE.
STEPS AND MISSTEPS TOWARD AN EMERGING PROFESSION.
ANOTHER SOLUTION TO THE FERMI PARADOX.
A VERY LIQUID HEAVEN.
Venus and Mars dominate fall evenings, vying for attention on opposite sides of the sky.
Great Masses from Little Ripples Grew.
The Wild Man of Samoa.
Fighting HIV with HIV.
Something Fishy in the Nest.
Nebulous Categories.
Lawless in Mesopotamia.
Saving Nemo. (cover story)
Pyroelectricity: From Ancient Curiosity to Modern Imaging Tool.
Einstein's Unknown Insight and the Problem of Quantizing Chaos.
Polarized Gamma-Ray Beams.
Glauber, Hall, and Hänsch Share the 2005 Nobel Prize in Physics.
Peace Prize Goes to ElBaradei and Nuclear Watchdog Agency.
Albert Einstein as a Philosopher of Science.
Ludwig Prandtl's Bounaary Layer.
Why Is Ice Slippery? (cover story)
Two-Dimensional Optical Spectroscopy Identifies Crucial Intermolecular Couplings in Photosynthesis.
Images of Vortices Reveal Superfluidity in a Fermi Gas.
Single, Physics-Based Model Accounts for the Mechanical Pronerties of Diverse Bionolymer Gels.
First Identification of Host Galaxies for Short Gamma-Ray Bursts.
Order Parameter of the Chiral Potts Model Succumbs at Last to Exact Solution.
US Is Creating a Virtual Library to Help Restore Iraqi Science.
Einstein's Mistakes.
Transforming Physics Education.
Superconducting Circuits and Quantum Information.
Devices Based on the Fractional Quantum Hall Effect May Fulfill the Promise of Quantum Computing.
The Happy Thirties
Stellar Energy Generation and Solar Neutrinos.
Hans Bethe and Quantum Electrodynamics.
Hans in War and Peace.
Hans Bethe and the Theory of Nuclear Matter.
Hans Bethe and Astrophysical Theory.
New Products.
Radioisotope Tracers Reveal Extensive Melting in Earth's Distant Past. (cover story)
Tiny Mirror Asymmetry in Electron Scattering Confirms the Inconstancy of the Weak Coupling Constant.
Math and Science Partnership Program Struggling at NSF.
Is Economics the Next Physical Science?
Einstein Versus the Physical Review.
Obliterating Myths About Minority Institutions.
Photo Opps At Butterfly World.
2005 Conference Program Descriptions.
Cairo's Camel Market Survivor of an Ancient Glory.
The Enchanting Amazon.
Getting Started in Photography.
Japan Through Gaijin Eyes.
have you wondered... about the Board's photographic interests?
Salt Lake City 2005.
Cologne & Bonn.
You're invited to Salt Lake City.
2005 National Officer Slate.
Creative Flower Photography. (cover story)
Land of Water and Awe: Algonquin Park.
News.
Program Schedule.
Capturing Wildflowers.
Operating Room PHOTOGRAPHY.
Hyenas.
Picture Yourself in Salt Lake City.
Distinctive Image.
2003-2004 Audit Report.
Mandalay. (cover story)
Little Things That Can Spoil a Picture--and How to Fix Them.
Curling -- The Equivalent to Watching Wallpaper Peel?
2005 PSA International Exhibition. (cover story)
PSA 2005 Honors & Awards Recipients.
India A Photographer's Paradise.
To Photograph Wildlife: Use Common Scents.
Creating Images (Some memories of an old timer).
2005 PSA Youth Showcase.
A PSA Adventure Cruise 2005!
GRANDEUR of the Alps.
A TECTONIC SHIFT IN GLOBAL HIGHER EDUCATION.
THE BOLOGNA PROCESS. (cover story)
BETWEEN IMPARTIALITY AND BIAS.
Building the Teaching Commons.
MY COLLEGE EDUCATION.
FIVE PERSISTENT PUBLISHING MYTHS AMONG SCHOLARLY AUTHORS WITH BIG-BOOKSTORE DREAMS.
LEARNING THROUGH TEACHING: A New Perspective on Entering a Discipline.
THE WRITING ON THE WALL: Doctoral Education in Texas and Elsewhere.
New Learning Environments for the 21st Century: EXPLORING THE EDGE.
EDUCATION, Information Technologies, and the Augmentation of Human Intellect.
LIMITS OF FREEDOM: The Ward Churchill Case.
CIVIC ENGAGEMENT IN HIGHER EDUCATION.
THE PROMISE OF OPEN EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES.
The Evangelical MIND Revisited. (cover story)
Using Theatre to Stage Instructional and Organizational Transformation.
INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE COLLEGE YEARS.
Community College TRANSFERS and College Graduation.
THE FUTURE TRAIN WRECK: PAYING FOR MEDICAL COSTS FOR HIGHER EDUCATION'S RETIREES.
THE FACULTY Writing Place: A ROOM OF OUR OWN.
A FIELD STUDY OF FIRST AID KNOWLEDGE AND ATTITUDES OF COLLEGE STUDENTS IN KUWAIT UNIVERSITY.
THE RELATIONSHIP OF STUDENT EMPLOYMENT TO STUDENT ROLE, FAMILY RELATIONSHIPS, SOCIAL INTERACTIONS AND PERSISTENCE.
WHY STUDENTS RETURN FOR A MASTER'S DEGREE IN SPORT MANAGEMENT.
QUANTIFYING THE IMPACT OF FOOD PREPARATION SKILLS AMONG COLLEGE WOMEN.
COLLEGE STUDENTS' PERCEPTIONS OF UNIVERSITY IDENTIFICATION AND FOOTBALL GAME DAY ATTIRE.
LOW INCOME STUDENTS: THEIR LIVED UNIVERSITY CAMPUS EXPERIENCES PURSING BACCALAUREATE DEGREES WITH PRIVATE FOUNDATION SCHOLARSHIP ASSISTANCE.
MARITAL STATUS, ETHNICITY, ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT, AND ADJUSTMENT STRAINS: THE CASE OF GRADUATE INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS.
AN ATTEMPT TO ASSIST STUDENT-ATHLETES TO SUCCEED IN VARIOUS WAYS: A PILOT STUDY.
CHARACTERISTICS OF AN EFFECTIVE WEB SITE IN EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP.
COMPARISON OF SOME SECONDARY BODY COMPOSITION ALGORITHMS.
IT'S MORE THAN DRINKING, DRUGS, AND SEX: COLLEGE STUDENT PERCEPTIONS OF FAMILY PROBLEMS.
THE EXPERIENCES AND ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS OF AFRICANS AT A HISTORICALLY BLACK INSTITUTION.
STUDENTS' PERCEPTIONS OF REFERENCE LETTERS.
AN OPERATIONAL DEFINITION OF CLASS PARTICIPATION.
COLOR MEMORY OF UNIVERSITY STUDENTS: INFLUENCE OF COLOR EXPERIENCE AND COLOR CHARACTERISTIC.
REHABILITATION COUNSELOR EDUCATION STUDENTS' CAREER GOALS: A PARTIAL REPLICATION STUDY.
ADMINISTRATION OF SCHOOLS.
PLUS/MINUS GRADING: A WITHIN INSTRUCTOR COMPARISON.
SHAKING UP THE STATUS QUO: CHALLENGING INTOLERANCE OF THE LESBIAN, GAY AND BISEXUAL COMMUNITY AT A PRIVATE ROMAN CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY.
IDENTITY NEGOTIATION AMONG FEMALE CHINESE INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS IN SECOND-LANGUAGE HIGHER EDUCATION.
EXTENDING SPECIALIST TRAINING IN COUNSELING: THE EFFICACY OF SELF-INSTRUCTION.
AFRICAN AMERICAN COLLEGE STUDENTS' PERCEPTIONS OF PSYCHOSOCIAL FACTORS INFLUENCING RACIAL DISPARITIES IN HEALTH.
PERSISTENCE TOWARD BACHELOR DEGREE COMPLETION OF STUDENTS IN FAMILY AND CONSUMER SCIENCES.
ON YOUR MARK, GET SET, WALT! ARE YOUR TEACHER CANDIDATES PREPARED TO EMBED ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGY IN TEACHING AND LEARNING?
FACTORS AFFECTING QUALITY OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LEARNING IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN NIGERIA.
ASSESSMENT OF THE AFFECTIVE EVALUATION COMPETENCIES OF SOCIAL STUDIES TEACHERS IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN WESTERN NIGERIA.
REDUCING PREJUDICE ON CAMPUS: THE ROLE OF INTERGROUP CONTACT IN DIVERSITY EDUCATION.
THE COMMUNITY COLLEGE CLASSROOM ENVIRONMENT: STUDENT PERCEPTIONS.
CHALLENGES CONFRONTING FEMALE INTERCOLLEGIATE ATHLETIC DIRECTORS OF NCAA MEMBER INSTITUTIONS BY DIVISION.
Colorado's Voucher Legislation and The Consequences for Community Colleges.
An Assessment of Web Accessibility Knowledge and Needs at Oregon Community Colleges.
Editor's Choice: Sexual Harassment Education on Campus: Communication Using Media.
UCLA Community College Review: Reverse Transfer and Multiple Missions of Community Colleges.
ANALYSIS OF APPLICATION OF 1:3 RATIO IN EMPLOYMENTS OF ACADEMIC AND NON-ACADEMIC STAFF IN NIGERIAN UNIVERSITIES.
PARENTAL ROLES IN THE ACQUISITION OF PRIMARY LEVEL SKILLS: AN EXPLORATORY VIEW ON THE LOW-INCOME HISPANIC-AMERICAN FAMILIES WITH 3 AND 4-YEAR OLD CHILDREN.
COLLEGE STUDENTS' EVALUATIVE REACTIONS TO ARABIC LOANWORDS USED IN THE CONTEXT OF THE IRAQ WAR.
MATRICULATION RELATED WASTAGE IN NIGERIAN UNIVERSITIES.
ASSESSMENT OF THE PROVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SERVICES UNDER THE UNIVERSAL BASIC EDUCATION (UBE) SCHEME IN SOUTHERN NIGERIA.
PROSPECTIVE TEACHERS' PERSPECTIVES ON MICROTEACHING LESSON STUDY.
GRADUATE INTERVENTION SPECIALISTS' RESPONSES TO AN INTRODUCTORY PRACTICUM: IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHER EDUCATORS.
IDENTITY DEVELOPMENT OF EAST ASIAN FEMALE INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS WITH IMPLICATIONS FOR SECOND-LANGUAGE HIGHER EDUCATION.
A STUDY OF THE EFFECTIVENESS ON PARENTAL SEXUALITY EDUCATION.
INFORMAL FORUM: FOSTERING ACTIVE LEARNING IN A TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM.
THE INFLUENCE OF FOUR ELEMENTARY PRINCIPALS UPON THEIR SCHOOLS' READING PROGRAMS AND STUDENTS' READING SCORES.
PERCEPTIONS OF PARENTS OF STUDENTS WITH AUTISM TOWARDS THE IEP MEETING: A CASE STUDY OF ONE FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP CHAPTER.
A MODEL FOR EXAMINING, ANALYZING, EVALUATING, AND UNDERSTANDING EVENTS, ACTS AND UTTERANCES.
SUPPORTING SCHOOL PROFESSIONALS THROUGH THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A SCHOOL DISTRICT POLICY ON CHILD MALTREATMENT.
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT AMONG ALUMNI ACADEMIC HONOR SOCIETY LEADERS.
CO-TEACHING: HOW TO MAKE THIS MARRIAGE WORK IN FRONT OF THE KIDS.
ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIES IN ASSESSING SPECIAL EDUCATION NEEDS.
MATH ANXIETY IN PRE-SERVICE ELEMENTARY SCHOOLTEACHERS.
PROJECT SUMMIT: A COOPERATIVE EFFORT TO EFFECT TEACHER CHANGE.
AN INVESTIGATION OF AN AFTER SCHOOL MATH TUTORING PROGRAM: UNIVERSITY TUTORS + ELEMENTARY STUDENTS = A SUCCESSFUL PARTNERSHIP.
LEADERSHIP IN HIGHER EDUCATION AND THE SECOND HALF OF LIFE.
CULTURAL DISCONTINUITY BETWEEN HOME AND SCHOOL LANGUAGE SOCIALIZATION PATTERNS: IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHERS.
EFFICACY OF ALTERNATIVE TEACHER CERTIFICATION PROGRAMS: A STUDY OF THE FLORIDA MODEL.
THE BIG UNEASY.
WHY CURRICULAR CHANGE IS DIFFICULT -- AND NECESSARY.
2006 Leading Edge Schools.
The NAIS Governance Survey, 2006.
A View from Both Sides of the Boardroom.
The Big-Picture Board.
FROM RESPONSIBLE TO EXCEPTIONAL.
REVITALIZING OUR PUBLIC MISSION.
Capitol Question.
SCHOOL CHOICE AND THE ONGOING VOUCHER DEBATE IN FLORIDA.
the long spoon.
A MAP TO THE FUTURE?
how children develop resiliency.
THE WAY WE WERE.
SORTING IT OUT.
BEFORE THE WORLD CHANGED.
Rhymes.
Class, Popular Media, and Independent Schools.
Beyond Black and White.
THE SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC REALITIES THAT CHALLENGE ALL SCHOOLS: INDEPENDENT, CHARTER, AND REGULAR PUBLIC SCHOOLS ALIKE.
a space at the table.
The Tuition equation.
meeting [their] needs.
THE CHALLENGE OF CLASS ISSUES IN SCHOOL.
Is the Middle-Class Squeeze for Real?
A New Forensic Picture Polygraph Technique for Terrorist and Crime Deception System.
Are Individualized Education Plans a Good Thing? A Survey of Teachers' Perceptions of the Utility of IEPs in Regular Education Settings.
Factors of a Low-SES Household: What Aids Academic Achievement?
Effects of Self-Regulated Learning on Mathematics Achievement of Selected Southeast Asian Children.
The Effect of Motivation, Family Environment, and Student Characteristics on Academic Achievement.
Effect of Text Presentation on Reading Fluency and Comprehension: An Exploratory Analysis.
An Examination of Two Teacher Rating Scales: What Can They Tell Us About How Well We Teach?
School-Age Children Raised by Their Grandparents: Problems and Solutions.
Writing in the Mathematics Curriculum.
Florida's Dramatic Shift in Student Demographics: Implications for Mathematics Teacher Education.
Motivating Novice Students to Read their Textbooks.
Reliability and Validity of the Watson-Glasere Critical Thinking Appraisal-Forms for Different Academic Groups.
Attitudes of Under-Graduate Education Majors on Web-Enhanced and Traditional Instruction at Fayetteville State University.
The Dilemma of Primary School Attendance in Nigeria.
Using Digital Cameras for Multidimensional Learning in K-12 Classrooms.
Virtual Group Problem Solving in the Basic Communication Course: Lessons for Online Learning.
The Inequivalence of an Online and Classroom Based General Psychology Course.
Disturbing Behaviors in the Secondary Classroom: How Do General Educators Perceive Problem Behaviors?
Guided Imagery as an Effective Therapeutic Technique: A Brief Review of its History and Efficacy Research.
The Guidance Role of the Instructor in the Teaching and Learning Process.
Academic, Career and Personal Needs of Nigerian University Students.
Creating a Teacher Orientation Seminar for Certification Candidates: Priming Your Students for Success.
FEASP-related Emotions of Polish Secondary School Teachers and Students.
Level of Perceived Stress Among Lectures in Nigerian Universities.
Altering the Inappropriate Comments of a Student with Multiple Disabilities.
Impact of the No Child Left Behind Act in Alabama: A Review.
No Child Left Behind: Neglecting Excellence.
Inside Today's Classrooms: Teacher Voices on No Child Left Behind and the Education of Gifted Children.
Exploring Perceptions and Awareness of High Ability.
Perceptions of Developmental, Social, and Emotional Issues in Giftedness: Are They Realistic?
Cognizance of Gifted Education among Elementary-Education Professors from MCREL Member States.
Project STREAM: A 13-Year Follow-Up of a Pre-College Program for Middle- and High-School Underrepresented Gifted.
Creativity: A Social Approach.
Measuring Gifted Adolescents' Implicit Theories of Creativity.
Dimensions of Underachievement, Difficult Contexts, and Perceptions of Self.
Adjustment Problems, Self-Efficacy, and Psychological Distress Among Chinese Gifted Students in Hong Kong.
Factors Related to the Underachievement of University Students in Turkey.
According to Jim Gallagher.
Identification Discrepancies.
Research Commentary Point-Counterpoint: Diagnosis of Giftedness and ADHD.
The Possibility of Misdiagnosis of Giftedness and ADHD Still Exists: A Response to Mika.
Comments on Mika's Critique of Hartnett, Nelson, and Rinn's Article, "Gifted or ADHD? The Possibilities of Misdiagnosis".
Gifted Students Dropping Out: Recent Findings from a Southeastern State.
Mandated School-Improvement and Gifted Programs.
Technology-Mediated Consultation to Assist Rural Students: A Case Study.
Reaching Through the Screen: Using a Tablet PC to Provide Feedback in Online Classes.
Meeting the Needs for Special Education Teachers in New Mexico.
Distance Education Strategies to Support Practica in Rural Settings.
Characteristics of Effective Rural Elementary Schools for Students with Disabilities.
Finite Resources, Increasing Demands: Rural Children Left Behind? Educators Speak Out on Issues Facing Rural Special Education.
Assessment and Students with Disabilities: Issues and Challenges with Educational Reform.
The Impact of One State's Alternate Assessment Upon Instruction and IEP Development.
Rural Native Hawaiian Perspectives on Special Education.
Teachers' Cultural Knowledge and Understanding of American Indian Students and Their Families: Impact of Culture on a Child's Learning.
Early Childhood Education Among American Indian/Alaskan Native Children with Disabilities: Implications for Research and Practice.
The Person Behind the Face of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder: Student Experiences and Family and Professionals' Perspectives on FASD.
Student Success Skills: Tools and Strategies for Improved Academic and Social Outcomes.
An Integrative Model of Data-Based Decision Making for School Counseling.
An Update on Adolescent Drug Use: What School Counselors Need to Know.
Delivering Difficult News to Parents: Guidelines for School Counselors.
Web-Based Peer Supervision, Collective Self-Esteem and Case Conceptualization Ability in School Counselor Trainees.
Using Multimedia to Reduce Bullying and Victimization in Third-Grade Urban Schools.
The Career Fair as a Vehicle for Enhancing Occupational Self-Efficacy.
Career and College Planning Needs of Ninth Graders--as Reported by Ninth Graders.
Counselor Education Accountability: Training the Effective Professional School Counselor.
Social Skills Efficacy and Proactivity Among Native American Adolescents.
Exploratory Study of Common and Challenging Ethical Dilemmas Experienced by Professional School Counselors.
Students Who Self-Injure School Counselor Ethical and Legal Considerations.
School Counseling Departmental Web Sites: What Message Do We Send?
Looking Forward by Going Back: A School Counselor Educator's Return to School Counseling.
School Counselors and School Psychologists: Collaborating to Ensure Minority Students Receive Appropriate Consideration for Special Educational Programs.
The Impact of Vulnerabilities and Strengths on the Academic Experiences of Twice-Exceptional Students: A Message to School Counselors.
Developing Relationships with Rehabilitation Counselors to Meet the Transition Needs of Students with Disabilities.
Curriculum-Based Measurement and the Evaluation of Reading Skills of Spanish-Speaking English Language Learners in Bilingual Education Classrooms.
The Structure of Phonological Awareness Among Kindergarten Students.
Integrating Frameworks From Early Childhood Intervention and School Psychology to Accelerate Growth for All Young Children.
Developing a General Outcome Measure of Growth in the Cognitive Abilities of Children 1 to 4 Years Old: The Early Problem-Solving Indicator.
Assessing Effects of Directive Complexity on Accuracy of Task Completion in English Language Learners.
Response to Intervention for Young Children With Extremely Challenging Behaviors: What It Might Look Like.
Social and Emotional Foundations for Early Learning: A Conceptual Model for Intervention.
Addressing School Readiness: Expanding School Psychology in Early Education.
Of Helping and Measuring for Early Childhood Intervention: Reflections on Issues and School Psychology's Role.
A Framework for Building Capacity for Responsiveness to Intervention.
Preliminary Evidence of the Technical Adequacy of the Preschool Numeracy Indicators.
Ethnicity and Language Contributions to Dimensions of Parent Involvement.
ETHNIC DIFFERENCES IN ADOLESCENTS' MENTAL DISTRESS, SOCIAL STRESS, AND RESOURCES.
XENOPHOBIA, ETHNIC COMMUNITY, AND IMMIGRANT YOUTHS' FRIENDSHIP NETWORK FORMATION.
SUICIDE ATTEMPTS AMONG ADOLESCENT MEXICAN AMERICAN STUDENTS ENROLLED IN SPECIAL EDUCATION CLASSES.
THE ROLES OF SEX, GENDER, AND COPING IN ADOLESCENT DEPRESSION.
ADOLESCENTS' PSYCHOLOGICAL RESPONSE TO THE EXPERIENCE OF COMMUNITY INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE: A CROSS-NATIONAL AND A CROSS-CULTURAL COMPARISON.
RISK FACTORS FOR DEPRESSION IN EARLY ADOLESCENCE.
BULLYING AND VICTIMIZATION AMONG BLACK AND HISPANIC ADOLESCENTS.
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION-INDUCED ANGER AND ALCOHOL USE AMONG BLACK ADOLESCENTS.
THE SUCCESS OF TAIWANESE FATHERS IN GUIDING ADOLESCENTS.
FUTURE TIME PERSPECTIVE AND MOTIVATIONAL CATEGORIES IN ARGENTINEAN ADOLESCENTS.
THE INFLUENCE OF DISPOSITIONAL OPTIMISM AND GENDER ON ADOLESCENTS' PERCEPTION OF ACADEMIC STRESS.
ADOLESCENTS' SEXUAL SELF-DISCLOSURE ON THE INTERNET: DEINDIVIDUATION AND IMPRESSION MANAGEMENT.
PERCEIVED PARENT-CHILD RELATIONAL QUALITIES AND PARENTAL BEHAVIORAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTROL IN CHINESE ADOLESCENTS IN HONG KONG.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CHILDHOOD SEXUAL ABUSE AND SEXUAL HEALTH PRACTICES OF HOMELESS ADOLESCENTS.
DROPOUT POLICIES AND TRENDS FOR STUDENTS WITH AND WITHOUT DISABILITIES.
VIOLENCE AND MINORITY YOUTH: THE EFFECTS OF RISK AND ASSET FACTORS ON FIGHTING AMONG AFRICAN AMERICAN CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS.
The Dressman's Line: Transforming the Work of Costumers in Popular Hindi Film.
A Mean-Spirited Sport: Japanese Brazilian Croquet in São Paulo's Public Spaces.
Can't Beat Me Own Drum in Me Own Native Land: Calypso Music and Tourism in the Panamanian Atlantic Coast.
Inter-area Ethnography: A Latin Americanist in Japan.
Paradoxes of Homecoming: The Jews and Their Diasporas.
Negotiating Rights: Palestinian Refugees and the Protection Gap.
A Note on The Political Idea of "Latino" in American Life.
Feminine Strength: Reflections on Power and Gender in Israeli-Palestinian Culture.
Globalizing 'Postsocialism:' Mobile Mothers and Neoliberalism on the Margins of Europe.
A Native Take on Jamestown.
In Search of Ancient Earthquakes.
Alexander PIECE by PIECE.
The Americas' First Colony?
In Katrina's Wake. (cover story)
Pyramid Scheme.
Solar Circle.
Uncovering Ancient Thailand.
Back from the Brink.
Ages of Albania.
Artful Surgery.
The Little Colony That Couldn't.
The Mystery of Unknown Man E.
The Search for Peking Man.
City of the Dead. (cover story)
Digging Deep.
Rescued Frescoes.
Impossibly Old America?
First Soldier of the Gene Wars.
Scots on the Rocks.
The Neanderthal Code. (cover story)
A Community's Roots.
Rock in the Fuselage.
Damming Sudan.
Surprise Finds in Tequila Country.
A Crumbling Legacy.
ARCHAEOLOGY The Next 50 Years. (cover story)
Africa's Earliest Bananas.
Deconstructing a Maya Pyramid.
Opening Franco's Graves.
Egypt's Ageless Goddess.
Unearthing America's Czarist Heritage.
THE PREVALENCE AND DISTRIBUTION OF EMPLOYEE SUBSTANCE-RELATED PROBLEMS AND PROGRAMS IN THE ISRAELI WORKPLACE.
INITIATION TO PHARMACEUTICAL OPIOIDS AND PATTERNS OF MISUSE: PRELIMINARY QUALITATIVE FINDINGS OBTAINED BY THE OHIO SUBSTANCE ABUSE MONITORING NETWORK.
EFFECTS OF MASS COMMUNICATION ON ATTITUDES TOWARD ANABOLIC STEROIDS: AN ANALYSIS OF HIGH SCHOOL SENIORS.
WAITING TIME AS A BARRIER TO TREATMENT ENTRY: PERCEPTIONS OF SUBSTANCE USERS.
PATTERNS OF ILLICIT METHAMPHETAMINE PRODUCTION ("COOKING") AND ASSOCIATED RISKS IN THE RURAL SOUTH: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC EXPLORATION.
A PILOT STUDY OF REUNIFICATION FOLLOWING DRUG ABUSE TREATMENT: RECOVERING THE MOTHER ROLE.
AN EXPLORATORY STUDY OF SOCIO-CULTURAL FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO PRESCRIPTION DRUG MISUSE AMONG COLLEGE STUDENTS.
PRACTICING RISK CONTROL IN A SOCIALLY DISAPPROVED AREA: SWEDISH SOCIALLY INTEGRATED DRUG USERS AND THEIR PERCEPTION OF RISKS.
TRUST AND OTHER CHARACTERISTICS ASSOCIATED WITH HEALTH CARE UTILIZATION BY INJECTION DRUG USERS.
FAMILY STRUCTURE, FAMILY TENSION, AND SELF-REPORTED MARIJUANA USE: A RESEARCH FINDING OF RISKY BEHAVIOR AMONG YOUTHS.
COLLEGE UNDERGRADUATE RITALIN ABUSERS IN SOUTHWESTERN CALIFORNIA: PROTECTIVE AND RISK FACTORS.
RESEARCH NOTE: FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH SKIN CLEANING PRIOR TO INJECTION AMONG DRUG USERS.
SOCIAL RISKS FOR AT-RISK DRINKING IN YOUNG WORKERS: APPLICATION OF WORK-LIFE BORDER THEORY.
CAN SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGICAL DELINQUENCY THEORY EXPLAIN THE LINK BETWEEN MARIJUANA AND OTHER ILLICIT DRUG USE? A LONGITUDINAL ANALYSlS OF THE GATEWAY HYPOTHESIS.
preface.
From Genocide to Justice: Women's Bodies as a Legal Writing Pad.
Arab American Femininities: Beyond Arab Virgin/American(ized) Whore.
Pornographic Voice: Critical Feminist Practices among Sri Lanka's Female Garment Workers.
preface.
Gender and Secularism of Modernity: How Can a Muslim Woman Be French?
French Dressing: Race, Gender, and the Hijab Story.
Secularism aboard the Titanic: Feminists and the Debate over the Hijab in France.
Gender and Survival: A Jewish Family in Occupied France, 1940-1944.
Art Essay: Yun Suknam.
Homecoming.
Asian Mail-Order Brides, the Threat of Global Capitalism, and the Rescue of the U.S. Nation-State.
We Are (Not All) Homophobes: A Report from Poland.
A TRIBUTE TO WILBUR ZELINSKY.
WILBUR AS ICON.
THE NON--PENNSYLVANIA TOWN: DIFFUSION OF URBAN PLAN FORMS IN THE AMERICAN WEST.
NODAL HETEROLOCALISM AND TRANSNATIONALISM AT THE UNITED STATES-CANADIAN BORDER.
KIDS AND SPACE IN THE PUERTO RICAN HIGHLANDS.
CHANGING EXPECTATIONS AND INSTITUTIONS: AMERICAN WOMEN GEOGRAPHERS IN THE 1970S.
WILBUR AND ME.
SACRED SPACES, COMMON PLACES: THE CEMETERY IN THE CONTEMPORARY AMERICAN CITY.
RESTRUCTURING AMERICA'S DAIRY FARMS.
GREAT OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE MANY OF SMALL MEANS: NEW JERSEY'S AGRICULTURAL COLONIES.
RACIALIZED TOPOGRAPHIES: ALTITUDE AND RACE IN SOUTHERN CITIES.
Social Workers in the Substance Abuse Treatment Field: A Snapshot of Service Activities.
Men's Adjustment to Their Partners' Breast Cancer: A Dyadic Coping Perspective.
A Practitioner's Response to the New Health Privacy Regulations.
Effectiveness of a Care Coordination Model for Stroke Survivors: A Randomized Study.
Psychosocial Outcomes for Adult Children of Parents with Severe Mental Illnesses: Demographic and Clinical History Predictors.
Prevention and Women's Reproductive Health: A Matter of Concern.
The Clubhouse as an Empowering Setting.
Significance of Gender and Age in African American Children's Response to Parental Victimization.
End-of-Life Decision Making for Nursing Home Residents with Dementia: A Survey of Nursing Home Social Services Staff.
A Survey of the Health, Sleep, and Development of Children Adopted from China.
Fostering Resilience in Siblings of Youths with a Chronic Health Condition: A Review of the Literature.
Do Not Forget about Your Volunteers: A Qualitative Analysis of Factors Influencing Volunteer Turnover.
Addressing Sexual Issues in Individuals with Chronic Health Conditions.
Social Work Ethics Audits in Health Care Settings: A Case Study.
Medicaid Coverage of Newer Psychotropic Medication.
Social Work in the Department of Veterans Affairs: Lessons Learned.
Functional Limitations and Religious Service Attendance among African American and White Older Adults.
Worries of the Oldest-Old.
Organizational Characteristics Influencing Nursing Home Social Service Directors' Qualifications: A National Study.
Race Disparities in Health among Older Adults: Examining the Role of Productive Engagement.
Stress Constellations and Coping Styles of Older Adults with Age-Related Visual Impairment.
An Examination of the Social Networks and Social Isolation in Older and Younger Adults Living with HIV/AIDS.
The Trouble with Health Savings Accounts: A Social Work Perspective.
Leadership initiative Teaches Principles through Practice.
Mentoring Marines to Prevent Sexist and Violent Behavior against Women.
Freedom and Guidance Allow Grad Students to Take the Lead.
Nano-Textiles Are Engineering a Safer World.
Weightless or Pregnant: Maximizing Mineral Metabolism.
Further Adventures of the Incredible Plastic Brain.
The Behavioral Assessment of Parents and Coaches at Youth Sports: Validity and Reliability.
Empowering Youth through a Responsibility-based Cross-Age Teacher Program: An Investigation into Impact and Possibilities.
The Effect of Four Instructional Formats on Aerobic Fitness of Junior-High School Students.
Effect of Participation in a Cup Stacking Unit on Hand-Eye Coordination of Elementary Children.
Effects of Medicine Ball Training on Fitness Performance of High-School Physical Education Students.
Maintaining Connections: A Web-Enhanced Approach to Undergraduate Internship Supervision.
A Physical Education Learning Community: Development and First-year Assessment.
Pre-service Physical Educators: Their Demographics, Wellness Practices, and Teaching Interests.
The Effectiveness of a University Level Conceptually-Based Health-Related Fitness Course on Health-Related Fitness Knowledge.
Point--Counterpoint The Physically Illiterate Physical Educator.
Developing Student Affect in a University Self-Defense Course.
Rethinking Middle School Physical Education: Combining Lifetime Leisure Activities and Sport Education to Encourage Physical Activity.
Parents' Perceptions of their Child's 5th Grade Physical Education Program.
Using Assessment to Support Basic Instruction Programs In Physical Education.
Pre-Service Physical Education Teacher's Perceptions of Teaching Before and After a Semester Long Elementary Physical Education Practicum Experience.
Steps to a Successful Physical Education Teacher Education Workshop.
Elementary Students' Accounts of Optimal Challenge in Physical Education.
Physical Activity Patterns of PETE Majors: Do They Walk the Talk?
A Profile of Western (USA) Higher Education Physical Education Degree Programs.
Student Perceptions of a Conceptual Physical Education Activity Course.
Trading Sex: Voluntary or Coerced? The Experiences of Homeless Youth.
Sexual Practices at Last Heterosexual Encounter and Occurrence of Orgasm in a National Survey.
Sex, Lies, and Videos in Rural China: A Qualitative Study of Women's Sexual Debut and Risky Sexual Behavior.
Women's Sexual Desire: A Feminist Critique.
Use of Pornography in Traditional Media and on the Internet in Norway.
No Strings Attached: The Nature of Casual Sex in College Students.
Women's Acceptance of the Diaphragm: The Role of Relationship Factors.
Dating, Marital, and Hypothetical Extradyadic Involvements: How Do They Compare?
Predictors of Sexual Risk-Taking Among New Drug Users.
Women's Sexual Working Models: An Evolutionary-Attachment Perspective.
Young Urban Adults' Heterosexual Risk Encounters and Perceived Risk and Safety: A Structured Diary Study.
Adolescents' Contact With Sexuality in Mainstream Media: A Selection-Based Perspective.
The Recalled Childhood Gender Questionnaire-Revised: A Psychometric Analysis in a Sample of Women with Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia.
Guilty or Not? A Path Model of Women's Sexual Force Fantasies.
Stages of Sexual Readiness and Six-Month Stage Progression Among African American Pre-Teens.
Do Unions Matter? An Examination of the Historical and Contemporary Role of Labor Unions in the Social Work Profession.
Using Intergroup Dialogue to Promote Social Justice and Change.
A Template for Spiritual Assessment: A Review of the JCAHO Requirements and Guidelines for Imolementation.
Dealing with the Aftermath: A Qualitative Analysis of Mental Health Social Workers' Reactions after a Client Suicide.
Leaving Care: Retrospective Reports by Alumni of Israeli Group Homes.
The Roots of Human Rights Advocacy and a Call to Action.
Condomless Sex: Gay Men, Barebacking, and Harm Reduction. (cover story)
The African Orphan Crisis and International Adoption.
Social Workers' Attitudes about Psychotropic Drug Treatment with Youths.
Financial Well-Being of Young Children with Disabilities and Their Families.
Are We Ignoring Youths with Disabilities in Foster Care? An Examination of Their School Performance.
Acculturation Stress and Depression among Asian Immigrant Elders.
The Animal-Human Bond and Ethnic Diversity.
Social Work in the Movies: Another Look.
Role of the Social Worker in Old versus New Culture in Nursing Homes.
Mitigating Circumstances in Death Penalty Decisions: Using Evidence-Based Research to Inform Social Work Practice in Capital Trials.
Rhetoric for Direct Practice.
Who's Oppressing Whom? Homosexuality, Christianity, and Social Work.
MEDIEVAL LEPROSY RECONSIDERED.
AN ANALYSIS OF REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH COMPONENTS IN YEMEN.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS IN CHINA: PROBLEMS, POLICIES, AND GLOBAL IMPLICATIONS.
FITTED TO RECEIVE THE WORD OF GOD: EMOTIONS AND SCIENTIFIC NATURALISM IN THE RELIGIOUS REVIVALS OF THE 1830s.
U.S. FOREIGN POLICY IN ASIA SINCE 9/11: TEMPORARY ALLIANCES OR PERMANENT CHANGES?
SCOTTISH NATIONALISM BEFORE 1789: AN IDEOLOGY, A SENTIMENT, OR A CREATION?
THE PROGRAM FOR BETTER JOBS AND INCOME: WELFARE REFORM, LIBERALISM, AND THE FAILED PRESIDENCY OF JIMMY CARTER.
IDEOLOGICAL INCOMPATIBILITY: THE FORCED FUSION OF NAZISM AND PROTESTANT THEOLOGY AND ITS IMPACT ON ANTI-SEMITISM IN THE THIRD REICH.
RELIGION AND DEPRESSION AMONG U.S. COLLEGE STUDENTS.
Effects of Aerobic and Circuit Training on Fitness and Body Image Among Women.
Motives of Competitive and Non-Competitive Cyclists.
Viability of Resting Electroencephalograph Asymmetry as a Predictor of Exercise-induced Affect: A Lack of Consistent Support.
Differences in Physical Self-concept Among Pre-Adolescents Who Participate in Gender-Typed and Cross-Gendered Sports.
Changes in EEG Laterality Index Effects of Social Inhibition on Putting in Novice Golfers.
Affect Responses to Acute Bouts of Aerobic Exercise in Fit and Unfit Participants: An Examination of Opponent-Process Theory.
An Exploratory Study of Athletic Identity Among Elite Alpine Skiers with Physical Disabilities: Issues of Measurement and Design.
The Nature of Athlete Leadership.
Effects of Self-Instructions on Sport Performance.
Home Advantage in Soccer: Variations in its Magnitude and a Literature Review of the Inter-related Factors Associated with its Existence.
A Temporary Decline in Home Advantage When Moving to a New Stadium.
Examining the Potential Causal Relationship Between Sport Team Identification and Psychological Well-being.
Children's Self-Esteem Related to School- and Sport-Specific Perceptions of Self and Others.
Type of Activity as a Function of Experiencing a Depressive or Happy Event.
Effects of Acute Bouts of Aerobic Exercise of Varied Intensity on Subjective Mood Experiences in Women of Different Age Groups Across Time.
Team Captains' Perceptions of Athlete Leadership.
Competitive Orientations and Sport Motivation of Professional Women Football Players: An Internet Survey.
Differences Between Elite and Non-Elite, Male and Female Chinese Athletes on Cognitive Appraisal of Stressful Events in Competitive Sport.
Healthy and Unhealthy Weight Management Practices in Collegiate Men and Women.
Responses to the Sports Inventory for Pain among BASE Jumpers.
Dropout Reasons in Young Spanish Athletes: Relationship to Gender, Type of Sport and Level of Competition.
The Home Disadvantage: Examination of the Self-image Redefinition Hypothesis.
Seize the Moment! Establishing Vision-Related Rehabilitation and Access in the Nation's Public Health Policy Agenda.
Community Services, Needs, and Resources in Visual Impairment: A 21st Century Public Health Perspective.
Taming the Beast: Measuring Vision-Related Disability Using the International Classification of Functioning.
Double Jeopardy: The Effects of Comorbid Conditions among Older People with Vision Loss.
The Low Visibility of Low Vision: Increasing Awareness through Public Health Education.
A Model of Successful Work Experience for Employees Who Are Visually Impaired: The Results of a Study.
An Investigation of the Motivational Effects of Talking Pedometers Among Children with Visual Impairments and Deaf-Blindness.
A Look Back.
Learning and Using Print and Braille: A Study of Dual-Media Learners, Part 2.
Academic Achievement and Personality in University Students Who Are Visually Impaired.
Braille Literacy Skills: An Analysis of the Concept of Spelling.
Improving the Usability of a Mainstream Cell Phone for Individuals with Low Vision.
The Expanded Core Curriculum for Students Who Are Visually Impaired.
High-stakes Testing and Implications for Students with Visual Impairments and Other Disabilities.
NOT A 'CLOTH GIVER': ENTITLEMENT, HUNGER, AND ILLICIT TRANSFERS ON THE EMIN PASHA RELIEF EXPEDITION, 1886-1 890.
A LITTLE BIT LIKE A VOLCANO-THE UNITED PROGRESSIVE PARTY AND RESISTANCE TO ONE-PARTY RULE IN ZAMBIA, 1964-1980.
WE ARE MADE QUIET BY THIS ANNIHILATION: HISTORICIZING CONCEPTS OF BODILY POLLUTION AND DANGEROUS SEXUALITY IN SOUTH AFRICA.
PEOPLE, NOT POTS: LOCALLY PRODUCED CERAMICS AND IDENTITY ON THE NINETEENTH-CENTURY EAST AFRICAN COAST.
NAMIBIA: GOD'S OWN COUNTRY?
A SOLITARY TREE BUILDS NOT: HESHIMA, COMMUNITY, AND SHIFTING IDENTITY IN POST-EMANCIPATION PEMBA ISLAND.
THE RUPEE DISEASE: TAXATION, AUTHORITY, AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN EARLY COLONIAL UGANDA.
ELITE SLAVES IN ILORIN IN THE NINETEENTH AND TWENTIETH CENTURIES.
WAR AND MOBILITY IN THE BORDERLANDS OF SOUTH WESTERN AFRICA IN THE EARLY TWENTIETH CENTURY.
Decolonizing the Archaeological Landscape: The Practice and Politics of Archaeology in British Columbia.
Little Choice for the Chumash: Colonialism, Cattle, and Coercion in Mission Period California.
To Take Their Heritage in Their Hands: Indigenous Self-Representation and Decolonization in the Community Museums of Oaxaca, Mexico.
Beyond Racism: Some Opinions about Racialism and American Archaeology.
Overcoming Hindrances to Our Enduring Responsibility to the Ancestors: Protecting Traditional Cultural Places.
A New Thing? The NMAI in Historical and Institutional Perspective.
You Are Here: The NMAI as Site of Identification.
What Are Our Expectations Telling Us? Encounters with the NMAI.
No Sense of the Struggle: Creating a Context for Survivance at the NMAI.
South of the Border at the NMAI.
Archaeology for the Seventh Generation.
THE 2005 IRAQI ELECTIONS AND LAW: A POSITIVIST TALE.
THE FASCINATION OF AN EGYPTIAN INTELLECTUAL WITH EUROPE: TAHA HUSAYN AND FRANCE.
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICIES AND SPATIAL CONTROL: THE CASE OF THE ARAB LOCALITIES DEVELOPMENT IN ISRAEL.
U.S. Newspaper Coverage of the Canadian Health System--A Case of Seriously Mistaken Identity?
Nathanson, Zukor, and Famous Players: Movie Exhibition in Canada, 1920-1941.
Books Received.
The Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America.
Canada and Human Security: From the Axworthy Doctrine to Middle Power Internationalism.
The European Union and Sovereignist Politics in Quebec: Who Forgot Their Glasses?
The Effect of North American Trade Liberalization on the Nature of Canadian Trade, 1989-2002.
Would a Borderless North America Kill Canadian Culture?
The India Model.
India and the Balance of Power.
America's New Strategic Partner?
Will Kashmir Stop India's Rise?
How to End It.
No Model War.
Separating Iraqis, Saving Iraq.
Last Train From Baghdad.
Biddle Replies.
A Benign Revolution.
The New Middle East.
The Future of Lebanon.
Israel's War With Iran.
The Syrian Solution.
From Conflict Management to Conflict Resolution.
Immigration Nation.
When Congress Checks Out.
How We Fight.
The New Global Slave Trade.
Danger and Opportunity in Eastern Europe.
China's Leadership Gap.
Is There Still a Terrorist Threat?
After Proliferation.
The Next Secretary-General.
God's Country?
How to Keep the Bomb From Iran.
The Next War of the World.
Mexico's Disputed Election.
France and Its Muslims.
Global NATO.
The Real Online Terrorist Threat.
The Rise of Intelligence.
Changes From Below.
The New Politics of Opposition.
Cuba and China.
Young Blood.
Poverty and Inequality in Cuba.
Cuba's New Daddy.
The End of Rationing?
Everything Old Is New Again.
External Peace, Internal Violence.
Democracy and Defense.
The Hemispheric Security Agenda.
Military Internationalism.
Charting New Waters.
Mexico's Armed Forces.
Asserting/Inventing Traditions on the Luapula.
A Crown on the Move.
Amazigh Textiles and Dress in Morocco. (cover story)
ART OF BEING TUAREG.
African Art and Culture in Maine.
Going Global.
Ethiopian Painting of King Takla Haymanot's War with the Dervishes.
African Worlds.
Sense, Style, Presence.
Beaded Prayers.
Contrary to the Temptation!
Trophies of Grace?
In My Garment There Is Nothing But God.
Destiny World.
Les arts premiers in Paris: Le monument de l'Autre.
Ghanaian Interweaving in the Nineteenth Century.
DAK'ART 2006 POSITIONS AND PERSPECTIVES.
Samson Mudzunga, Dzingoma, and New Mythologies.
DARA, MALI.
Africa 05.
The Performative Icon. (cover story)
Lesser Brothers: Franciscan Mission and Identity at Assisi.
A Point "Ceaselessly Pushed Back": The Origin of Early Netherlandish Painting.
Théophile Silvestre's Histoire des artistes vivants: Art Criticism and Photography.
Framing St. Peter's: Urban Planning in Fascist Rome.
Sex and Spirituality in 1500s Rome: Sebastiano del Piombo's Martyrdom of Saint Agatha.
Herri met de Bles's Sleeping Peddler: An Exegetical and Anthropomorphic Landscape.
Capturing Your Sound: A Guide to Live Recording.
Building Curriculum-Based Concerts.
Using Improvisation as a Teaching Strategy.
Using the Native American Flute in a Beginning Instrumental Classroom.
Self-Analysis Skills for the Developing Singer.
Empowering Music Student Teachers through Inquiry: Cooperating Teacher Views.
The National Anthem at a Glance.
Collaboration and Access for Our Children: Music Educators and Special Educators Together. (cover story)
Partnering with Music Therapists: A Model for Addressing Students' Musical and Extramusical Goals. (cover story)
I Send My Best Matthew to School Every Day: Music Educators Collaborating with Parents. (cover story)
Children with Disabilities Playing Musical Instruments. (cover story)
Students with Disabilities in a High School Band: "We Can Do It!". (cover story)
Mentoring and Professional Development Programs: Possibilities and Pitfalls. (cover story)
An Instrumental Approach to Culture Study in General Music.
Opening the Doors to Diverse Traditions of Music Making: Multicultural Music Education at the University Level.
Teaching and Using Audiation in Classroom Instruction and Applied Lessons with Advanced Students.
Taking the Long View toward Music Teacher Preparation: The Rationale for a Dual-Degree Program.
Navigating through Induction: How a Mentor Can Help.
Takadimi: A Rhythm System for All Ages.
Every Child a Singer: Techniques for Assisting Developing Singers.
Playing without Pain: Strategies for the Developing Instrumentalist.
Effective Time Management in Ensemble Rehearsals.
Once a Student, Now a Mentor: Preparing to Be a Cooperating Teacher.
Education through Collaboration: Learning the Arts while Celebrating Culture.
India's Music: Popular Film Songs in the Classroom.
Eight Simple Rules for Singing Multicultural Music.
Music That Represents Culture: Selecting Music with Integrity.
Audiation for Beginning Instrumentalists: Listen, Speak, Read, Write.
Improving Dictation as an Aural-Skills Instructional Tool.
Diary of a Buren Spectator.
Czech Poetics Today: Tradition and Renewal.
Are Fictional Worlds Really Possible? A Short Contribution to Their Semantics.
Mimesis and the Subject in the Light of the Cognitive Impulse and the Theory of Fictional Worlds.
Types of Worlds: On Relations between the Prague School and the Theory of Fictional Worlds.
The Theory of Fictional Worlds, Aesthetic Function, and the Future of Literary History.
Representation of Being and Existence in an Epistemically Limited Fictional World.
Discovering the Fictional Worlds of Lyric Poetry.
Reading Prague: Narrative Domains of the Image of the City in Fiction.
From Otherworldliness and a Two-World Scheme to "Heterocosmica": A Visit to a Museum with Cortázar and Nabokov.
How Many (Different) Kinds of Fictional Worlds Are There?
Introduction.
Remarks on English Long-Distance Anaphora.
Why No(t)?
On the Conceptual-Procedural Distinction.
Used to and Habitual Aspect in English.
Disjunctive Numerals of Estimation.
Vulgar Latin: Comparative Castration (and Comparative Theories of Syntax).
Wild Language.
Lectures on Bubblemint and Grinding.
Getting Squishy.
On the Razor's Edge: A Familiar Essay.
Art, Science, and Ste. Emilie's Sunsets: A Háj-Inspired Cognitive Approach to Translating an Emily Dickinson Poem into Japanese.
Burning Gold For John Robert Ross.
Kanji: The Visual Metaphor.
Rimbaud's First Blood: Le lai du lait de Cabaner.
The Data Fetishist's Guide to Rime Coherence.
PREGNANT PAUSE.
Early Exits.
The HIV CONUNDRUM.
MAKING RAIN ON THE Net.
Preparing for the WORST.
MILBERG WEISS on the HOT SEAT.
TOP TEN IN TECH.
Match POINT.
Art ATTACK.
Feeling THE HEAT. (cover story)
Life in Question… Continued.
UP AGAINST THE SEAWALL.
FACING THE FACTS.
the Big Bopper.
Asylum Ordeals.
THE RITES Wrangle.
TAXING CONSEQUENCES.
Give and Get--That's the ABE Difference.
WAIVING GOODBYE?
TORT REFORM TEXAS STYLE.
Rogue Jurors.
Seeking the CURE.
Backing Away from the ABYSS.
Stressing Yourself Sick.
PERSONALIZED PRESCRIPTIONS.
Troll Control.
HISTORICAL RECONCILIATION: REDRESS, RIGHTS AND POLITICS.
EDITORS' FOREWORD.
TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE: A HOLISTIC INTERPRETATION.
DEPOLARIZING THE PAST: THE ROLE OF HISTORICAL COMMISSIONS IN CONFLICT MEDIATION AND RECONCILIATION.
NEGOTIATING TRUTH: THE HOLOCAUST LEHAVDIL AND AL-NAKBA.
RECONCILIATION AS A DIRTY WORD: CONFLICT COMMUNITY RELATIONS AND EDUCATION IN NORTHERN IRELAND.
SRI LANKA'S CONFLICT: CULTURE AND LINEAGES OF THE PAST.
CONFEDERATE MEMORY AND MONUMENTS: OF JUDICIAL OPINIONS, STATUTES AND BUILDINGS.
RECONCILIATION AND ECONOMIC REACTION: FLAWS IN SOUTH AFRICA'S ELITE TRANSITION.
IS RECONCILIATION BETWEEN HUTUS AND TUTSIS POSSIBLE?
THE POLITICS OF VICTIMHOOD: HISTORICAL MEMORY AND PEACE IN SPAIN AND THE BASQUE REGION.
RECONCILIATION IN RWANDA: EDUCATION HISTORY AND THE STATE.
A CRITICAL EVALUATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS VOLCANIC EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM: EVIDENCE FROM LATIN AMERICA.
EDITOR'S FOREWORD.
GLOBALIZATION OF DISASTER: TRENDS, PROBLEMS AND DILEMMAS.
THE CHANGING FACE OF NORMAL DISASTER: RISK, RESILIENCE AND NATURAL SECURITY IN A CHANGING CLIMATE.
TERM LIMITS FOR THE SUPREME COURT: LIFE TENURE RECONSIDERED.
THE IDEOLOGICAL STAKES OF ELIMINATING LIFE TENURE.
THE MAKING OF A NEW COPYRIGHT LOCKEAN.
AN ECONOMIC ASSESSMENT OF SAME-SEX MARRIAGE LAWS.
TOWARD A BASAL TENTH AMENDMENT: A RIPOSTE TO NATIONAL BANK PREEMPTION OF STATE CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS.
Documenting the Value of Faith Community Nursing: 1. Saving Hundreds, Making Cents - A Study of Current Realities.
The Safety Paradox.
Long-term follow-up after gentamicin application via the Silverstein MicroWick in the treatment of Ménière's disease.
Pharmacokinetically enhanced amoxicillin/clavulanate (2,000/125 mg) in acute bacterial rhinosinusitis caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae, including penicillin-resistant strains.
Associations between fatigue and medication use in chronic rhinosinusitis.
Office-based arytenoid palpation for diagnosis of disorders of bilateral vocal fold immobility.
Free-text data entry by speech recognition software and its impact on clinical routine.
Fibrin glue in thyroid and parathyroid surgery: Is under-flap suction still necessary?
Primary carcinoid tumor of the parotid gland: A case report and review of the literature.
Spinal accessory nerve monitoring with clinical outcome measures.
Two cases of incidental epidermoid cysts: Sphenoid sinus and temporal bone.
Secretions, occlusion status, and swallowing in patients with a tracheotomy tube: A descriptive study.
Sudden sensorineural hearing loss and hemodialysis.
A case of skull base mucormycosis with osteomyelitis secondary to temporal bone squamous cell carcinoma.
Assessment of patient satisfaction with various configurations of digital CROS and BiCROS hearing aids.
Development of nasal skin necrosis associated with rituximab treatment for Waldenström's macroglobulinemia and subsequent spontaneous resolution.
Extramedullary plasmacytoma of the nasal cavity: Treatment perspective in a developing nation.
Solitary fibrous tumor of the floor of the mouth: Case report and review of the literature.
Sialoblastoma: A rare submandibular gland neoplasm.
Three-dimensional computed tomography and surgical treatment for Eagle's syndrome.
Herpes simplex virus infection presenting as a piriform sinus mass.
Thyroglossal duct cyst: An unusual presentation.
Nasal septal perforation secondary to rhinitis medicamentosa.
Partial middle turbinectomy by nasotracheal intubation.
Infantile supraglottic hemangioma: A case report.
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors of the head and neck: Two cases and a review of the literature.
Coexistent cervical tuberculosis and metastatic squamous cell carcinoma in a single lymph node group: A diagnostic dilemma.
Computer-assisted surgery and computer-assisted telesurgery in otorhinolaryngology.
Isolated cementoossifying fibroma of the ethmoid bulla: A case report.
Sinonasal lymphoma: A case report.
Middle ear injury through the external auditory canal: A review of 44 cases.
Invasive fungal sinusitis caused by Pseudallescheria boydii: Case report and literature review.
Transnasal endoscopic resection of juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma without preoperative embolization.
Spontaneous facial subcutaneous emphysema.
Liposarcoma of the tongue: Case report and review of the literature.
A third branchial pouch cyst presenting as a lateral neck mass in an adult.
Management of post-tympanostomy tube otorrhea in children.
Update on the medical and surgical treatment of chronic suppurative otitis media without cholesteatoma.
Topical antibiotic treatment of acute uncomplicated otitis externa.
How serious a problem is topical aminoglycoside ototoxicity?
Topical and systemic ototoxicity: Medicolegal considerations.
Role of impacted cerumen in hearing loss.
Fibrous dysplasia of the frontal bone.
Malignancy in asymmetrical but otherwise normal palatine tonsils.
Toxoplasmosis lymphadenitis presenting as a parotid mass: A report of 2 cases.
Polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma of the parotid gland.
Cutaneous angiosarcoma of the head and neck: A case presentation and review of the literature.
Blood-but not bleeding-at a tracheotomy site: A case of Munchausen's syndrome.
Do corticosteroids prevent hearing loss in pediatric bacterial meningitis? An analysis of the evidence.
Incorporating the endoscope into middle ear surgery.
Primary B cell lymphoma of the external auditory canal.
Perforating and migrating pharyngoesophageal foreign bodies: A series of 5 patients.
The 'sentinel clot' sign in spontaneous retropharyngeal hematoma secondary to parathyroid apoplexy.
Current technique for resection of mediastinal goiter.
Community Urbanization and Hospitalization of Adults for Asthma. (cover story)
Simple and Rapid Method for Detection of Bacterial Spores in Powder Useful for First Responders.
Evaluation of a Model Training Program for Respiratory -- Protection Preparedness at Local Health Departments.
Strategies for Eliminating and Reducing Persistent Bioaccumulative Toxic Substances: Common Approaches, Emerging Trends, and Level of Success.
Microbial Inactivation by Microwave Radiation in the Home Environment.
Assessing the Willingness of the Public to Pay to Conserve Urban Green Space: The Hangzhou City, China, Case.
Profiles in Leadership, Part I: JEH Goes on a Quest.
Analyzing Acute-Chemical-Release Data to Describe Chemicals That May Be Used as Weapons of Terrorism.
Hepatitis A in a food Worker and Subsequent Prophylaxis of Restaurant Patrons.
A Comparison of Environmental Legislation and Regulation in New Zealand and the United States.
Recurrent Critical Violations of the Food Code in Retail Food Service Establishments.
Ethnic-Food Safety Concerns: An Online Survey of Food Safety Professionals.
Climate-Based Descriptive Models of Dengue Fever: The 2002 Epidemic in Colima, Mexico.
Sterols as Bio-markers for Waste Impact and Source Characterization in Stream Sediment.
Where's the Meat? The Need for Full Public Disclosure in Meat Recalls.
Usage and Data Collection Patterns for a Novel Web-Based Foodborne-Disease Surveillance System.
Assessing Occupational Mercury Exposures During the On-site Processing of Spent Fluorescent Lamps.
Environmental Transmission of SARS at Amoy Gardens.
Five-Year Surveillance of West Nile and Eastern Equine Encephalitis Viruses in Southeastern Virginia.
Incorporating Problem-Based Learning Exercises into an Environmental Health Curriculum.
In-situ Liquid Storage Capacity Measurement of Subsurface Wastewater Absorption System Products. (cover story)
Performance of Aerobic Treatment Units: Monitoring Results from the Florida Keys.
The Distribution of Staphylococci in Bioaerosols from Red-Meat Abattoirs.
An Opportunity: Improving Client Services During Disaster Relief.
CDC Grant Program Supports Environmental Health Services Delivery.
Analysis of Governmental Web Sites on Food Safety Issues: A Global Perspective.
Nitrate, Coliforms, and Cryptosporidium spp. as Indicators of Stream Water Quality in Western Pennsylvania.
Environmental Health and Pandemic Flu.
The Public Health Response to Disasters in the 21st Century: Reflections on Hurricane Katrina.
The New Jersey Residential Well-Testing Program-A Case Study: Randolph Township.
Changes in Immunological and Hematological Parameters of Female Residents Exposed to Volatile Organic Compounds in the City of Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
Recent Research from Lessons Learned Information Sharing: The Importance of Partnerships in the Rural Water Response to Hurricane Katrina. (cover story)
Traumatic Pelvic Fractures.
Objective Measurement of Stiffness in Knee Osteoarthritis.
Broken Bones: Common Pediatric Fractures-Part I.
HIPAA--Implications for Research.
Handle with Care: The American Nurses Association's Campaign to Address Work-Related Musculoskeletal Disorders.
Evidence-Based Practices for Safe Patient Handling and Movement.
NIOSH Research Efforts to Prevent Musculoskeletal Disorders in the Healthcare Industry.
Broken Bones: Common Pediatric Lower Extremity Fractures--Part III.
Complications.
An Overview of Radiography, Computed Tomography, and Magnetic Resonance Imaging in the Diagnosis of Lumbar Spine Pathology.
Genetic Testing and Counseling: Selected Ethical Issues.
Bone Neoplasms.
The Perioperative Implications of Obstructive Sleep Apnea.
Impact of External Fixation on Adolescents: An Integrative Research Review.
Broken Bones: Common Pediatric Upper Extremity Fractures--Part II.
e-Knee: The Electronic Knee Prosthesis.
Journal Club.
Accessing and Evaluating the Internet for Patient and Family Education.
Managing Insomnia.
2006: best, notable, & recommended.
north of 49: resource links best of 2005.
engaging students in storytelling.
picture books for young adults.
Flash: engaging learners through animation, interaction, and multimedia.
graphic literacy.
what flavor is your school library? the teacher-librarian as learning leader.
learning about learning: from theories to trends.
beyond wikipedia.
the spirit of inquiry in information literacy.
teacher and teacher-librarian collaboration: moving toward integration.
turn up the music with digital technologies.
tools for the learning leader.
wikis and student writing.
collaboration as an element of school culture: Biblioteca Las Américas.
using discussion to extend and enhance student research.
a collaborative event: an elementary unit on severe weather preparedness.
catch them (preservice teachers) while you can!
teacher-librarians, teachers, and children as cobuilders of school library collections.
reach out to riches: collaborating with museums and cultural institutions to enhance learning.
Mrs. Travis's traveling library: a teacher-librarian's attempt to gather data about reading aloud to students.
open-source software in school libraries.
school library blogging.
wikis and literacy development.
skills for the knowledge worker.
now what do we do? sustaining statewide digital libraries for a second decade.
they might be gurus.
using Amazon.com to radically extend your library catalog.
protecting your home computer: an in-service workshop with teachers.
teacher-librarian as technology leader.
want to be my "friend"? what you need to know about social technologies.
Philosophy as Training for Death: Reading the Ancient Christian Martyr Acts as Spiritual Exercises.
The Real Presence of Mary: Eucharistic Disbelief and the Limits of Orthodoxy in Fourteenth-Century France.
The Origins of Southern Evangelicalism: Revivalism in South Carolina, 1700-1740.
Textual Healing: Mainstream Protestants and the Therapeutic Text, 1900-1925.
Pilgrimage, Place, and People: A History of the Locations of Mennonite World Conference Assemblies, 1925-2003.
A Profile of the Membership of the American Society of Church History.
Miracles, Early Modern Science, and Rational Religion.
The Covenantal Quietism of Tobias Crisp.
The EXTRAORDINARY CRUELTY of "EXTRAORDINARY RENDITION" (cover story)
THE VICTIMS AND THE FURIES IN AMERICAN COURTS.
THE AFRICAN AIDS CRISIS AND INTERNATIONAL INDIFFERENCE.
Toward a New Assumption in Law and Ethics.
The Sage of Unbelief: George Eliot and Unorthodox Choices.
Overcoming Antagonistic Atheism to Recast the Image of Humanism.
Why Are You Here? (cover story)
EXAMINED LIVES in the SHADOW OF IRAQ. (cover story)
Yes, We Murder Journalists.
THE MYTHOLOGIZING OF WAR FROM VIETNAM TO IRAO. (cover story)
THE PASHTUN FACTOR: IS AFGHANISTAN NEXT IN LINE FOR AN ETHNIC CIVIL WAR? (cover story)
A Fundamentally Wrong Direction.
PROCESS EDUCATION: A Humanistic Response to Fundamentalism.
Naturalism vs. Supernaturalism: How to Survive the Culture Wars.
Religion and Liberal Democracy.
TIMELINE.
Moral Exo-Skeletons and Endo-Skeletons: A Key Divide in the American Body Politic.
In Katrina's Wake: Healthcare Crises in New Orleans.
THE RELIGIOUS RIGHT GOES TO WASHINGTON. (cover story)
What Went Wrong In Mexico?
When Civil Rights Were on the Rise.
Crossing Mount Soledad.
The Apocalypse of the United States as the Leading World Power.
SOLDIER GIRL?
The Evolutionary Psychology of Religion.
The Criminal Stereotype.
Parenting Stress in Parents of Hispanic Adolescents.
Perceived Exclusion in the Workplace: The Moderating Effects of Gender on Work-Related Attitudes and Psychological Health.
Evidence for an Own-Age Bias in Face Recognition.
Direct and Indirect Effects of Task Characteristics on Organizational Citizenship Behavior.
The Attribution of Responsibility in Acquaintance Rape Involving Ecstasy.
Materialism and Money Spending Disposition as Predictors of Economic and Personality Variables.
Long-term Deficits in Adaptive Behavior Secondary to Ethylene Dichloride Exposure.
A Study of Sense of Humor in Spanish and American Samples.
Black and White Fathers of Early Adolescents: A Cross-Cultural Approach to Curriculum Development for Parent Education.
Hair Pulling in a Diverse College Sample.
Belief Persistence in Impression Formation.
Current Recruitment and Selection Practices: A National Survey of Fortune 1000 Firms.
An Interview with Delia Stafford About Alternative Certification.
The Development and Validation of an Indirect Measure of Celebrity Stalking.
School-based Substance Abuse Programs: Can They Influence Students' Knowledge, Attitudes, and Behaviors Related to Substance Abuse?
An Interview with Frank Gresham.
Athletic Style of Dress and Perceived Social Distance.
African-Americans and Latinos with Chronic Fatigue: Examining the Role of Acculturation Status.
Relationship of Primary versus Secondary Control Beliefs to Attitudes toward Seeking Help.
Attitude Toward Capital Punishment is Related to Capital and non-Capital Sentencing.
GIFT THEORY AND THE BOOK OF JOB.
THE STARTING POINT OF SYSTEMATIC THEOLOGY.
RESURRECTION--INTERRUPTION--TRANSFORMATION: INCARNATION AS HERMENEUTICAL STRATEGY.
STAY WITH US… (LK 24:29)--"COME, LORD JESUS" (REV 22:20): INCARNATION, ESCHATOLOGY, AND THEOLOGY'S SWEET PREDICAMENT.
RESURRECTION: SAVING PARTICULARITY: THEOLOGICAL-EPISTEMOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS OF INCARNATION AND TRUTH.
RESPONSE TO ANTHONY GODZIEBA AND LIEVEN BOEVE.
RESURRECTION AND THE COSTS OF EVOLUTION: A DIALOGUE WITH RAHNER ON NONINTERVENTIONIST THEOLOGY.
THE TIMES THEY ARE A 'CHANGIN': A RESPONSE TO O'MALLEY AND SCHLOESSER.
EUCHARISTIC JUSTICE.
THROUGH A GLOSS DARKLY: BIBLICAL ANNOTATIONS AND THEOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION IN MODERN CATHOLIC AND PROTESTANT ENGLISH-LANGUAGE BIBLES.
THEOLOGICAL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE SCRIPTURAL TEXT: LESSONS FROM THE QUMRAN AND SYRIAC EXEGETICAL TRADITIONS.
FOR WHAT MAY WE HOPE? THOUGHTS ON THE ESCHATOLOGICAL IMAGINATION.
A PROCREATIVE PARADIGM OF THE CREATIVE SUFFERING OF THE TRIUNE GOD: IMPLICATIONS OF ARTHUR PEACOCKE'S EVOLUTIONARY THEOLOGY.
CULTURE, RELIGION, AND MORAL VISION: A THEOLOGICAL DISCOURSE ON THE FILIPINO PEOPLE POWER REVOLUTION OF 1986.
GRAPES!
A Focus on Grape Genetics.
Wind and Sun and Farm-Based Energy Sources.
Ground-to-Air Coverage at Ames.
We Can Have It Both Ways!
Fine-Tuning Nursery and Greenhouse Plant Care.
Revolutionized Rangeland Monitoring.
Remarkable Kazak Apples.
Super Soy!
Fresh-Cuts Are Popular, Any Way You Slice Them.
Pining for Profits and Healthy Forests.
Defending U.S. Grain Crops From Fungal Assault.
Breeding Better Beans.
COOKING UP TEMPTING, FAT-FIGHTING FOODS AND INGREDIENTS.
Changing Lifestyles To Fight Obesity in the Delta -- A Tale of Three Communities.
ARS EXPERTS AS FIREFIGHTERS.
Healthy Potatoes, Healthy People, Healthy Profit.
Killer Fungi.
POSTHARVEST FOOD SAFETY INNOVATIONS IMPROVE BEEF SAFETY.
Subduing Salmonella.
Keeping Meat and Poultry Safe.
Breeding Versatile Vegetables. (cover story)
Sticking It to the South American Cactus Moth.
Probing Peppers' Water Needs: Middle East Meets American West.
A Synthesizer's Parting Words: Ernst Mayr Reflects on Evolutionary Biology as Science.
AlBS news.
Reproducibility and Repeatability in Ecology.
Madagascar Defiant.
Oscillating Populations and Biodiversity Maintenance.
A Global Crisis for Seagrass Ecosystems.
The Social Resonance of Competitive and Progressive Evolutionary Metaphors.
Securing Economic Benefits and Promoting Conservation through Bioprospecting.
AIBS news.
Dead Zones Spreading in World Oceans.
Evolution of Hormone Function: Proglucagon-derived Peptides and Their Receptors.
Ethanol as Fuel: Energy, Carbon Dioxide Balances, and Ecological Footprint.
Environmental Protection Using DNA Barcodes or Taxa?
The Millennium Assessment.
From Lilliput to Brobdingnag: Extending Models of Mycorrhizal Function across Scales.
Threats to Endangered Species in Canada.
How Many Animals Do We Want to Save? The Many Ways of Setting Population Target Levels for Conservation.
The Epidemiology of H5N1 Avian Influenza in Wild Birds: Why We Need Better Ecological Data.
Science and Economics in the Management of an Invasive Species. (cover story)
AIBS news.
Sexual Conflict, Ecology, and Breeding Systems in Shorebirds. (cover story)
Disturbance and Aquatic Biodiversity: Reconciling Contrasting Views.
Are Vultures Birds, and Do Snakes Have Venom, because of Macro- and Microscavenger Conflict?
TRACKING U.S. GROUNDWATER.
ECONOMICS, WATER MANAGEMENT, AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND BEYOND.
RAISING GLOBAL STANDARDS. (cover story)
QUICK FIXES FOR THE ENVIRONMENT.
URBAN TRANSITION IN MONGOLIA.
RENEWABLE ENERGY GAINS MOMENTUM.
NAVIGATING THE MAZE.
AVOIDING GREEN MARKETING MYOPIA. (cover story)
URBANIZATION AND THE METROPOLITAN ENVIRONMENT: LESSONS FROM NEW YORK AND SHANGHAI. (cover story)
URBAN WATERSHED MANAGEMENT: SUSTAINABILITY, ONE STREAM AT A TIME. (cover story)
FOREST CERTIFICATION IN DEVELOPING AND TRANSITIONING COUNTRIES • • • Part of a Sustainable Future?
Learning from History. (cover story)
PUTTING ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN A SUSTAINABILITY CONTEXT.
A Glimpse Out the Window. (cover story)
computing.
Harvesting the Waves.
campus heat and power.
Common Language.
SAFETY SKILLS.
Mining What Others Miss. (cover story)
BEST INTENTIONS.
Managing Across Cultures.
The Age of Ingenuity.
new products.
A New Dawn for Diesel. (cover story)
IDLE HOUR.
Soup to NUTS.
ENGINEERING FOR THE SPECTACLE.
The True Harnessing of Steam.
UP TO SNUFF.
NO RUN OF THE MILL.
THE CHINA ROAD.
The Greater Good.
new products.
computing.
POWER TRANSMISSION AND MOTION CONTROL.
A STEP CLOSER TO MARS.
Virtual OR.
NO EINSTEIN.
THE FAINT YOUNG SUN PARADOX.
CREATING NASA'S SPACE SCIENCE EDUCATION AND PUBLIC OUTREACH PROGRAM: THE REAL STUFF (ABRIDGED).
RUNNING THE LINE: THE ASTRONOMY OF MASON & DIXON.
sky events.
society scope.
MERCURY'S TIME TO SHINE. (cover story)
THE CLEARING PASSAGE.
TAKING STEPS TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE.
POINTING YOUR CURSOR TO THE UNIVERSE.
Mercury crosses the face of the Sun for the last time until May 2016.
Times of Our Lives.
Happy Birthday, Linnaeus.
Traveling Green.
The Other Kinsey Report.
The Scaly Ones.
From Fins to Limbs.
Beyond the Big Bang.
Bushels of Bots.
Unfit for Vision.
Origins of Floral Diversity.
This Old House.
Good Fences, Good Neighbors?
Golden Tomb Fit for a Queen.
Cooking the Climate with Coal.
Matters of Size.
As Time Goes By.
Blues' Revival.
Broken Pieces of Yesterday's Life.
Shocking Truths.
Wildebeests of the Serengeti.
First Experiment at National Ignition Facility Focuses on Hydrodynamics of Plasma Jets.
War, Terrorism, and Growing Deficits Limit Bush FY 2006 R&D Budget; Civilian Science Funding Flat.
Turbulent Liquid-Sodium Flow Induces Magnetic Dipole in a Laboratory Analogue of the Geodynamo.
Putting Mechanics into Quantum Mechanics. (cover story)
The Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics of Small Systems.
Physics and the Real World.
A Physics Songbag.
Modeling the Sumatra-Andaman Earthquake Reveals a Complex, Nonuniform Rupture.
Limiting Light Pollution Is Ongoing Challenge.
Living with a Variable Sun.
Ups and Downs of Nuclear Isomers.
Citation Statistics from 110 Years of Physical Review.
Semiconductor Quantum Dots Take First Steps Toward Spin-Based Quantum Computation.
Enormous Magnetic Reconnection Event Washes over Three Spacecraft Millions of Kilometers Apart.
Fifty Years of Seeing Atoms.
Two Hundred Years of Capillarity Research.
Macromolecular Phasing.
APS March Meeting Has Broad Purview.
New Products.
APS Hands Out Awards and Prizes at March and April Meetings.
Record Gamma-Ray Flare Is Attributed to a Hypermagnetized Neutron Star in Our Galaxy.
Evidence for a Plasma Inside a Sonoluminescing Bubble.
Accelerator Labs Regroup as Photon Science Surges.
Nuclear Power Needs Government Incentives, Says Task Force.
Runaway Breakdown and the Mysteries of Lightning.
The Uranium Bomb, the Calutron, and the Space-Charge Problem.
An Organic Electronics Primer. (cover story)
New Products.
The Heineken Regatta.
2006 Conference Program Descriptions.
Windmills of Holland.
3000 Miles & 900 Nanometers.
Visit New England Capture the World.
Lions of Nakuru, Kenya. (cover story)
PSA 68th ANNUAL CONFERENCE Baltimore.
Adventure 2006 was just that!
Baltimore.
Techniques for Successful Bird Photography.
Photographing Point Lobos.
India's Wonderful Secret: A Journey Through Orissa. (cover story)
Around the Waterholes and Lagoons in Southern Sri Lanka.
Tribal Identity through Body Art: Extraordinary People Living in the Remnants of Time.
FLORIDA BIRDS: Seducing Photographers.
Finding Inspiration in Ordinary Landscapes.
Digital Photography on the Fly, While Hiking in Switzerland.
News.
Your Photographic Style.
THE 2006 CONFERENCE PHOTO TOURS Come to Baltimore.
Egypt and Jordan A PHOTOGRAPHIC ADVENTURE.
Windmills of the Cyclades.
Racing Photography. (cover story)
Diffuser.
Photographing Virginia's War Memorial.
Where Art Deco is In: South Beach!
Birds of Botswana.
2006 PSA International Exhibition.
2006 Honors & Awards.
Track & Field Photography Made Simple.
The Majestic SaPa.
2006 PSA Youth Showcase.
The Birds of Bosque.
HOW SHOULD STATES RESPOND TO A TEST OF LEADERSHIP?
COUNTING AND RECOUNTING: Assessment and the Quest for Accountability.
Assessing Student Learning Responsibility: From History to an Audacious Proposal.
FIXED-TUITION PRICING: A Solution That May Be Worse Than the Problem.
From the Provincial to the International: The Missouri Southern Story.
Intellectual Entrepreneurship: Improving Education and Increasing Diversity.
THE ATHLETE STIGMA IN HIGHER EDUCATION.
PERCEPTIONS OF LEADERSHIP STYLES OF DEPARTMENT CHAIRS.
ACCULTURATION LEVEL, PERCEIVED ENGLISH FLUENCY, PERCEIVED SOCIAL SUPPORT LEVEL, AND DEPRESSION AMONG TAIWANESE INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS.
SERVICE LEARNING AND THE UNIVERSITY STUDENT.
TEACHER CERTIFICATION TESTS: USING LINEAR AND LOGISTIC REGRESSION MODELS TO PREDICT SUCCESS OF SECONDARY PRE-SERVICE TEACHERS.
ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE AND ADVISEMENT OF UNIVERSITY STUDENTS: A CASE STUDY.
STUDENTS' PERCEPTIONS OF THE RESIDENCE HALL LIVING ENVIRONMENT AT KUWAIT UNIVERSITY.
ACCEPTABILITY OF TREATMENTS FOR PLAGIARISM.
EFFECT OF TEST-EXPECTANCY AND WORD BANK AVAILABILITY ON TEST PERFORMANCE.
ANALYSIS OF PERSONAL STUDY TIME AND LEISURE AMONG UNIVERSITY UNDERGRADUATES IN SOUTHERN NIGERIA.
PROFESSORS' IRRITATING BEHAVIOR STUDY.
PERSONALITY PREFERENCES OF COLLEGE STUDENT-ATHLETES.
ELECTRONIFYING ORAL COMMUNICATION: REFINING THE CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR ONLINE INSTRUCTION.
STIMULANT USE AS CORRELATE OF ABUSIVE BEHAVIOUR AMONG NIGERIAN UNDERGRADUATES.
PERCEPTIONS OF ACCOUNTING PRACTITIONERS AND EDUCATORS ON E-BUSINESS CURRICULUM AND WEB SECURITY ISSUES.
Faculty Life at Community Colleges.
Creating and Sustaining Community College--University Transfer Partnerships.
Community College Institutional Effectiveness.
The Scholarly Contributions of Arthur M. Cohen.
Advancing Research on the Community College.
Organizing and Making Sense of the Literature.
The Cohen Contribution to Community College Leadership.
Teaching and Mentoring Future Leaders in the Field.
APPRECIATIVE INQUIRY: A MODEL FOR ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT IN STUDENT AFFAIRS.
EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE AND BEGINNING TEACHER CANDIDATES.
TECHNOLOGY IN THE CLASSROOM: FRIEND OR FOE.
REFLECTIVE PROCESS IN PLAY THERAPY: A PRACTICAL MODEL FOR SUPERVISING COUNSELING STUDENTS.
EVOLUTION OF RESPONSIBILITY: FROM IN LOCO PARENTIS TO AD MELIORA VERTAMUR.
MEDIA LITERACY AS AN EDUCATIONAL METHOD FOR ADDRESSING COLLEGE WOMEN'S BODY IMAGE ISSUES.
CONCEPTIONS OF SELF AND THE USE OF DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES IN A LEARNING ENVIRONMENT.
STUDENT LIFESTYLES AND EMOTIONAL WELL-BEING AT A HISTORICALLY BLACK UNIVERSITY.
PREDICTORS OF COLLEGE STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT IN UNDERGRADUATE ASYNCHRONOUS WEB-BASED COURSES.
EXAMINING THE DEVELOPMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION IN THE STATE OF KUWAIT: AN EVOLVING PROGRAM.
Domestic Violence Against Women Who Have Disabilities: What Educators Need to Know
SELF-CONCEPT AND CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES.
UNIVERSAL BASIC EDUCATION (UBE) IN NIGERIA: AN APPRAISAL.
EXPLORING CULTURAL COMPETENCE PRACTICE IN UNDERGRADUATE SOCIAL WORK EDUCATION.
Spelling Seeks Input on Technology's Role in Schools.
'street schools' face.
Voicing Concern for English-Learners in Debate Over NCLB.
Looking Through a Wider Lens.
Spanning a Lifetime.
Breaking The Cycle Of Poverty.
The School-College Divide And Teacher Preparation.
A Road Map to College And Career Readiness.
A Continuum of Necessary Investments for Learning.
Elevating Performance In a 'Flat World.'.
State of the States.
The Unexplored Role of EOGs in the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency in a Rural County.
Middle School Teachers' Expectations of Organizational Behaviors of Students with Learning Disabilities.
Looking for the "Right Stuff.".
The Effects of a Direct Instruction Program on the Fraction Performance of Middle School Students At-risk for Failure in Mathematics.
Generic Critical Thinking Infusion and Course Content Learning in Introductory Psychology.
Cognitive Responses of Students Who Witness Classroom Cheating.
Rethinking Dyslexia, Scripted Reading, and Federal Mandates: The More Things Change, the More They Stay the Same.
The Mozart Effect: Musical Phenomenon or Musical Preference? A More Ecologically Valid Reconsideration.
Philosophy of Social Studies Education.
Adjusting Limit Setting in Play Therapy with First-Generation Mexican-American Children.
Barriers to Adjustment: Needs of International Students within a Semi-Urban Campus Community.
Correlates of Performance in Biological Psychology: How Can We Help?
Alternative Teacher Education Programs: A Review of the Literature and Outcome Studies.
Preferred Writing Topics of Urban and Rural Middle School Students.
From the Editor's Desk.
Self-Perception of Gifts and Talents Among Adults in a Longitudinal Study of Academically Talented High-School Graduates.
Ideational Code-Switching: Walking the Talk About Supporting Student Creativity in the Classroom.
Serving the Preschool Gifted Child: Programming and Resources.
The Development and Use of a Structured Teacher Observation Scale to Assess Differentiated Best Practice.
Case Studies of Gifted Kindergarten Children Part II: The Parents and Teachers.
Fighting the War on Indecency: Mediating TV, Internet, and Videogame Usage among Achieving and Underachieving Gifted Children.
Empowerment Theory for the Professional School Counselor: A Manifesto for What Really Matters.
National Certification: Evidence of a Professional School Counselor?
Developmental Counseling and Therapy as a Model for School Counselor Consultation with Teachers.
Critical Incidents in the Development of Supportive Principals: Facilitating School Counselor-Principal Relationships.
Day-to-Day Activities of School Counselors: Alignment with New Directions in the Field and the ASCA National Model.
The Relationships of Peer Norms, Ethnic Identity, and Peer Support to School Engagement in Urban Youth.
An Examination of Referrals to the School Counselor by Race, Gender, and Family Structure.
Middle School Students' Expectations About Counseling.
Introduction to Special Issue: Transitional Issues for K-16 Students.
Using the ASCA National Model to Facilitate School Transitions.
Helping Children Transition from Kindergarten to First Grade.
Mathematics Placement and the Transition to Middle School.
Preparing Inner-City Adolescents to Transition into High School.
Transitioning to High School: Issues and Challenges for African American Students.
Factors Influencing the Educational and Vocational Transitions of Black and Latino High School Students.
Walking the Talk in Bullying Prevention: Teacher Implementation Variables Related to Initial Impact of the Steps to Respect Program.
Forms and Functions of Aggression During Early Childhood: A Short-Term Longitudinal Study.
Use of Brief Experimental Analysis for Selecting Reading Interventions for English Language Learners.
A Survey of Training, Practice, and Competence in Reading Assessment and Intervention.
A Virtual Treasure Trove.
Making Things e-asy.
EAT Breakfast, DRINK Milk, PLAY Xbox. (cover story)
MAGNUM B.I.
the new librarians.
Opening A New Door.
If you can't beat 'em, Join 'em.
On Target.
Making the Impossible.
THE UNIVERSAL LANGUAGE.
A Program With Impact.
SOUTH DAKOTA 2.0.
COLLABORATE! EXPERIMENT! DISCOVER!
AN ONLINE COURSE OF ACTION.
Board CERTIFIED.
It's the Little Things.
SOUND SOLUTIONS.
VISION QUEST.
LEAVE ME ALONE…I'M SOCIALIZING.
CURRICULUM UNBOUND!
in::brief.
An Urge to Converge.
ENTERING A NEW DIMENSION.
Out of Print.
READING FIRST… Technology Second?
A War of Words.
The X Files.
courting disaster.
the other data.
IT'S A BIRD, IT'S A PLANE, IT'S…Enterprise to the Rescue!
AGGRESSIVE ADOLESCENTS IN RESIDENTIAL CARE: A SELECTIVE REVIEW OF TREATMENT REQUIREMENTS AND MODELS.
ADOLESCENT PERCEPTION OF MOTHERS' PARENTING STRENGTHS AND NEEDS: A CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACH TO CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT FOR PARENT EDUCATION.
ADOLESCENTS' VIEWS ON WAR AND PEACE IN THE EARLY PHASES OF THE IRAQ CONFLICT.
TIME PERSPECTIVE AND SCHOOL MEMBERSHIP AS CORRELATES TO ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT AMONG AFRICAN AMERICAN ADOLESCENTS.
BEDROOM DESIGN AND DECORATION: GENDER DIFFERENCES IN PREFERENCE AND ACTIVITY.
EMPOWERING SCHOOL SOCIAL WORK PRACTICES FOR POSITIVE YOUTH DEVELOPMENT: HONG KONG EXPERIENCE.
PERCEIVED PARENTAL BEHAVIORAL CONTROL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTROL IN CHINESE ADOLESCENTS IN HONG KONG: A REPLICATION.
IMPETUS FOR WORSHIP: AN EXPLORATORY STUDY OF ADOLESCENTS* IDOL ADORATION BEHAVIORS.
NEXUS ALIQUIS: IN PURSUIT OF EFFICACY, RESILIENCE, AND FULL POTENTIAL.
SETTING GOALS, SOLVING PROBLEMS, AND SEEKING SOCIAL SUPPORT: DEVELOPING ADOLESCENTS' ABILITIES THROUGH A LD7E SKILLS PROGRAM.
A LONGITUDINAL STUDY ON TRANSACTTONAL RELATIONS BETWEEN PARENTAL MARITAL DISTRESS AND ADOLESCENT EMOTIONAL ADJUSTMENT.
EMPOWERMENT OR DISEMPOWERMENT? A REVIEW OF YOUTH TRAINING SCHEMES FOR NON-ENGAGED YOUNG PEOPLE IN HONG KONG.
EFFECTIVE GROUP WORK WITH DELINQUENTS IN HONG KONG.
IDENTITY AS A MODERATOR OF GENDER DIFFERENCES IN THE EMOTIONAL CLOSENESS OF EMERGING ADULTS' SAME- AND CROSS-SEX FRIENDSHIPS.
RURAL ADOLESCENT AGGRESSION AND PARENTAL EMOTIONAL SUPPORT.
VALIDATION OF THE MULTIPLE LANGUAGE VERSIONS OF THE HOPKINS SYMPTOM CHECKLIST-37 FOR REFUGEE ADOLESCENTS.
VALIDATION OF THE ADOLESCENT CONCERNS MEASURE (ACM): EVIDENCE FROM EXPLORATORY AND CONFIRMATORY FACTOR ANALYSIS.
PEER GROUP MEMBERSHIP AND A SENSE OF BELONGING: THEIR RELATIONSHIP TO ADOLESCENT BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS.
SOCIAL ISOLATION, PSYCHOLOGICAL HEALTH, AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS IN ADOLESCENCE.
UNIQUE PATHWAYS TO RESILIENCE ACROSS CULTURES.
PSYCHOSOCIAL FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH REPORTS OF PHYSICAL DATING VIOLENCE AMONG U.S. ADOLESCENT FEMALES.
DIFFERENCES IN INTELLIGENCE BETWEEN NONDELIQUENT AND DROPOUT DELINQUENT ADOLESCENTS.
FEELING THE BEAT: THE MEANING OF RAP MUSIC FOR ETHNICALLY DIVERSE MIDWESTERN COLLEGE STUDENTS--A PHENOMENOLOGICAL STUDY.
Closeness in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction: Debating Kinship and Biomedicine in Lebanon and the Middle East.
Constitutive Knowledge: Tracing Trajectories of Information in New Contexts of Relatedness.
Marrying a Marilyn of the Tropics: Manhood and Nationhood in Filipina-Japanese Marriages.
International Biodiplomacy and Global Ethical Forms: Relations of Critique Between Public Anthropology and Science in Society.
Bulgur Marriages and "Big" Women: Navigating Relatedness in Guinean Refugee Camps.
Gendered Anxieties: Islam, Women's Rights, and Moral Hierarchy in Java.
Secrets Revealed, Revelations Concealed: A Secret City Confronts its Environmental Legacy of Weapons Production.
The Politics and Aesthetics of Place-names in Sarawak.
Mahjong Agonistics and the Political Public in Taiwan: Fate, Mimesis, and the Martial Imaginary.
The Long Arm of Politics.
Messages from the Dead.
The New Face of Evolution. (cover story)
Mapping an Underwater World.
Hiking with Hannibal.
The Last Invasion.
The Lure of Móo.
Reshaping Waterloo.
Writing on the Wall.
Living Rock Art.
Profiteers on the High Seas.
Were Romulus and Remus Historical Figures? (cover story)
The Rape of Batán Grande.
Under Istanbul.
COMMERCE OF WAR.
Ghosts of Kosovo.
Beyond the Family Feud. (cover story)
A DIFFERENT HISTORY.
Forest of Broken Urns.
BETRAYING THE MAYA.
The Antikythera Mechanism.
Iceland's Unwritten Saga.
Diamond Rush.
Publish or Be Punished.
Archaeology at War.
How to Build a Pyramid. (cover story)
THE BATTLE OVER Amaknak Bridge.
Emblems of Empire.
The Slum and the Sacred Cave.
The Viking Experiment.
Written in BONE.
Going Coastal.
Edge of an Ethical Dilemma.
Letters to the Crocodile God.
The Once and Future Maya.
A Ride to the Afterlife.
Purple Reign.
The Dawn of Art.
A Tangled Journey Home.
Dirtraker.
First Churches of the Jesus Cult.
Mystery Circles of the Andes.
Are Lawyers Different? - Professional Resistance, Mandated Child Abuse Reporting and the Duty of Confidentiality.
INTRODUCTION TO THE SPECIAL ISSUE.
INTERNATIONAL POLICY ON ILLICIT DRUG TRAFFICKING: THE FORMAL AND INFORMAL MECHANISMS.
HIERARCHIES, MARKETS AND NETWORKS: ETHNICITY/RACE AND DRUG DISTRIBUTION.
RESEARCH ON UPPER LEVEL DRUG TRAFFICKING: A REVIEW.
ARENAS OF DRUG TRANSACTIONS: ADOLESCENT CANNABIS TRANSACTIONS IN ENGLAND--SOCIAL SUPPLY.
YOU'RE ALWAYS TRAINING THE DOG: STRATEGIC INTERVENTIONS TO RECONFIGURE DRUG MARKETS.
CONDITIONS THAT INCREASE DRUG MARKET INVOLVEMENT: THE INVITATIONAL EDGE AND THE CASE OF MEXICANS IN SOUTH TEXAS.
WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT? SUBSTANCE USE AND SOCIAL INTEGRATION FOR YOUNG PEOPLE CATEGORIZED BY SAME-SEX EXPERIENCE AND ATTRACTIONS.
ECONOMIC STRESSORS, SOCIAL INTEGRATION, AND DRUG USE AMONG WOMEN IN AN INNER CITY COMMUNITY.
DIFFERENCES IN HIV SEXUAL RISK BEHAVIORS BETWEEN HETEROSEXUAL AND NONHETEROSEXUAL MALE USERS OF METHAMPHETAMINE.
CONSUMER PERSPECTIVES ON CO-OCCURRING DISORDERS TREATMENT.
CHANGING PATTERNS OF DRUG USE IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC DURING THE POST-COMMUNIST ERA: A QUALITATIVE STUDY.
MORTALITY OF HOSPITALIZED DRUG USERS IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC.
SUBSTANCE USE AMONG CZECH ADOLESCENTS: AN OVERVIEW OF TRENDS IN THE INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT.
REGIONAL COMPARISON OF DRUG USE IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC IN 2002: SITUATION ANALYSIS IN WIDER DEMOGRAPHIC AND SOCIOECONOMIC CONTEXTS.
DEVELOPING THE SYSTEM OF DRUG SERVICES IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC.
INTRODUCTION TO THE SPECIAL ISSUE.
RHETORIC VERSUS PRACTICE IN CZECH DRUG POLICY.
LEGISLATION AND PRACTICE CONCERNING PROSECUTION OF DRUG OFFENSES IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC.
Sri Pada: Sacred Pilgrimage Mountain of Sri Lanka.
Wetlands as Flood Control: The Case of the La Crosse River Marsh.
Photojournal: Macau.
Tourism and Funerals: An Indonesian Experience.
Food Garden Capacity and Population Growth: A Case in Papua New Guinea.
GREAT GEOGRAPHERS.
Melamid in Iran: An American Geographical Society Photographic Legacy.
Country Name Calling: The Case of Iran vs. Persia.
Photojournal: The Changing Face of Contemporary Iran.
Iran: An Old Civilization and a New Nation State.
Hurricanes in Toronto: Distance, Identity, and the Jamaican Diaspora.
Lighthouse Symbolism in the American Landscape.
Photojournal: Venezuela.
How Real are Red America and Blue America?
The Legacies of Captain John Smith.
The Sun Always Comes Out after It Rains: Understanding Posttraumatic Growth in HIV Caregivers.
Age Group Differences in Depressive Symptoms among Older Adults with Functional Impairments.
Cancer Patients' Use of Social Work Services in Canada: Prevalence, Profile, and Predictors of Use.
Caregiver Grief in Terminal Illness and Bereavement: A Mixed-Methods Study.
Addressing Breastfeeding Disparities in Social Work.
HIV/AIDS Knowledge and Sexual Activity: An Examination of Racial Differences in a College Sample.
The Comprehensive Care Clinic.
Cribs for Kids: Risk and Reduction of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome and Accidental Suffocation.
Navigating Conflict: A Model for Nursing Home Social Workers.
Health and Mental Health Social Workers Need Information Literacy Skills.
Substance Abuse Treatment Outcomes for Coerced and Noncoerced Clients.
Experiences and Implications of Social Workers Practicing in a Pediatric Hospital Environment Affected by SARS.
Spiritually Based Resources in Adaptation to Long-Term Prostate Cancer Survival: Perspectives of Elderly Wives.
Impact of Work Requirements on the Psychological Well-Being of TANF Recipients.
Parental Influence, Gay Youths, and Safer Sex.
Strengths-Oriented Referrals for Teens (SORT): Giving Balanced Feedback to Teens and Families.
Intervention Approaches to Driving and Dementia.
Predicting Postpartum Depressive Symptoms in New Mothers: The Role of Optimism and Stress Frequency during Pregnancy.
English Language Proficiency and Health-Related Quality of Life among Chinese and Korean Immigrant Elders.
Allostatic Load: Single Parents, Stress-Related Health Issues, and Social Care.
Social-Strata-Related Cardiovascular Health Disparity and Comorbidity in an Aging Society: Implications for Professional Care.
Coping with Stressful Events: Influence of Parental Alcoholism and Race in a Community Sample of Women.
HIV/AIDS Case Managers and Client HIV Status Disclosure: Perceived Client Needs, Practices, and Services.
An Integrated, Multidimensional Treatment Model for Individuals Living with HIV, Mental Illness, and Substance Abuse.
Diabetes and Adult Day Health Services.
Not Just a Middle-Class Affliction: Crafting a Social Work Research Agenda on Postpartum Depression.
Bringing It All Back Home: Social Work and the Challenge of Returning Veterans.
Social Justice, Respect, and Meaning-Making: Keys to Working with the Homeless Elderly Population.
The Making of a Resource Center for Homeless People in San Francisco's Mission District: A Community Collaboration.
A Preliminary Examination of the Fitness Levels of Children Who Meet the President's Council Physical Activity Recommendation.
Project Adventure and Self Concept of Academically Talented Adolescent Boys.
Integration: Helping to Get Our Kids Moving and Learning.
The Promotion of Sociomoral Growth Through Physical Education: Field Testing of a Curricular Model.
Student Coaches' Knowledge, Attitudes, Skills, and Behaviors Regarding the Female Athlete Triad.
Whose Gym Is It? Gendered Perspectives on Middle and Secondary School Physical Education.
Using TARGET to Enhance Preservice Classroom Teachers' Ability to Identify and Develop a Motivational Climate in Physical Education.
Physical Education and its Effect on Elementary Testing Results.
Exploring the Relationship between Perceptions of Quality in Basic Instruction Programs and Repeat Participation.
The Communication of Opportunities and Barriers to Prospective Applicants: An Analysis of Interscholastic Athletic Administrative Job Announcements.
The Impact of State Standards on Physical Education in Wyoming--A Decade of Change.
Physical Education Teacher's Verbal Aggression and Student's Fair Play Behaviors.
Supporting Youth Development Outcomes: An Evaluation of a Responsibility Model-Based Program.
The Effect of Performance Cues on Beginning Indoor Rock Climbing Performance.
Opportunities to Participate and Teacher Interactions in Coed versus Single-Gender Physical Education Settings.
The Use of Web-based Portfolios in College Physical Education Activity Courses.
A Descriptive Analysis of Race/Ethnicity and Sex of Individuals Appearing on the Covers of Sports Illustrated in the 1990s.
Professional Dispositions: What Are We Teaching Prospective Physical Education Teachers?
AN INTERVIEW WITH PEPPER SCHWARTZ, PHD, SSSS FELLOW.
Suicide Prevention: An Analysis and Replication of a Curriculum-Based High School Program.
Legacy Denied: African American Gay Men, AIDS, and the Black Church.
America's Changing Attitudes toward Homosexuality, Civil Unions, and Same-Gender Marriage: 1977-2004.
Patient Navigation: A Call to Action.
Research on Foster Children: A Role for Social Work.
Understanding the Geospatial Relationship of Neighborhood Characteristics and Rates of Maltreatment for Black, Hispanic, and White Children.
Parenting Practices among Dominican and Puerto Rican Mothers.
How Clinical Diagnosis Might Exacerbate the Stigma of Mental Illness.
How Changes in the Pacific/Asia Region Are Shaping Social Work Education and Practice in Hawai'i.
Forrester Blanchard Washington and His Advocacy for African Americans in the New Deal.
Situational Approaches to Direct Practice: Origin, Decline, and Re-emergence.
Information Technology Acceptance in the Social Services Sector Context: An Exploration.
Borrowing to Save: A Critique of Recent Proposals to Partially Privatize Social Security.
Bending Gender, Ending Gender: Theoretical Foundations for Social Work Practice with the Transgender Community.
Re-examining Empathy: A Relational--Feminist Point of View.
Effects of Service Barriers on Health Status of Older Chinese Immigrants in Canada.
Increasing Safety for At-Risk Adults: Screening In-Home Care Providers.
Perspective Analysis: McKnight's Careless Society and the Strengths-Based Approach to Social Work.
In Their Words: Secondary Traumatic Stress in Social Workers Responding to the 9/11 Terrorist Attacks in New York City.
The Importance of Revitalizing Management Education for Social Workers.
POLICY POINT-COUNTERPOINT: THE UN MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS AND U.S. AID TO AFRICA.
POINT: UN MDGS AND U.S. AID TO AFRICA: WORTHY CAUSES.
COMMUNITY WELL-BEING AND THE CRIMINALIZATION OF MAGICO-RELIGIOUS WORKERS IN HARLEM, NEW YORK, DURING THE 1920s.
UNITY WITHOUT UNIFICATION: THE DEVELOPMENT OF NIGERIA'S 'INSIDE-OUT' APPROACH TO AFRICAN POLITICAL INTEGRATION, 1937-1963.
HIV/AIDS : THE PANDEMIC HITS THE 'SLEEPING GIANT'.
Coping Under Pressure: Cognitive Strategies for Maintaining Confidence Among Soccer Referees.
Stressors, Coping, and Coping Effectiveness Among Players from the England Under-18 Rugby Union Team.
The Use of Observational Learning by Athletes.
Self, Situations, and Sport Consumption: An Exploratory Study of Symbolic Interactionism.
Influence of Crowd Noise on Soccer Refereeing Consistency in Soccer.
The Effects of Contingent-Monetary Reinforcement and Music on Exercise in College Students.
Gender and the Selection of Public Athletic Role Models.
The Differences in Sport Aggression, Life Aggression, and Life Assertion Among Adult Male and Female Collision, Contact, and Non-Contact Sport Athletes.
The Early Years of Sport Psychology: The Work and Influence of Pierre de Coubertin.
Examining Reactions to the Dale Earnhardt Crash: The Importance of Identification with NASCAR Drivers.
Contrary to Popular Belief, Refs are People Too! Personality and Perceptions of Officials.
Goal Orientation and Sensation Seeking in Relation to Optimal Mood States Among Skateboarders.
Who do I Root for Now? The Impact of Franchise Relocation on the Loyal Fans Left Behind: A Case Study of Hartford Whalers Fans.
Perceived Athletic Competence, Sociometric Status, and Loneliness in Elementary School Children.
Differences in Participation Motives of First-time Marathon Finishers and Pre-Race Dropouts.
Editor's Page.
Use It or Lose It: The Medicare Low Vision Demonstration Project.
Nonvisual Route Following with Guidance from a Simple Haptic or Auditory Display.
Divergent Development of Manual Skills in Children Who Are Blind or Sighted.
Implementation of an Evidence-Based Guideline for the Referral of Adults Who Are Visually Impaired in the Netherlands: Potential Barriers.
Spanning the Pacific Ocean through Voice-over Internet Protocol Chat with the Hadley School for the Blind--China.
Promoting the Self-Determination of Students with Visual Impairments: Reducing the Gap Between Knowledge and Practice.
The Production of Brailled Instructional Materials in Texas Public Schools.
Finding a Target with an Accessible Global Positioning System.
Communication with Patients Who Have Low Vision.
Exploring Assessment Processes in Specialized Schools for Students Who Are Visually Impaired.
Literacy in Early Intervention for Children with Visual Impairments: Insights from Individual Cases.
Self-concept, Adjustment to Blindness, and Quality of Friendship Among Adolescents with Visual Impairments.
Clinical Assessment of Functional Movement in Adults with Visual Impairments.
Primary Support Persons for Individuals Who Are Visually Impaired: Who They Are and the Support They Provide.
Employment-related Experiences of Youths Who Are Visually Impaired: How Are These Youths Faring?
Technology and Early Braille Literacy: Using the Mountbatten Pro Brailler in Primary-grade Classrooms.
A Proposed Tactile Vision-substitution System for Infants Who Are Blind Tested on Sighted Infants.
A Qualitative Analysis of Reading Rehabilitation of Persons with Age-related Macular Degeneration.
Accessible GPS: Reorientation and Target Location Among Users with Visual Impairments.
The Legibility of Typefaces for Readers with Low Vision: A Research Review.
A Cognitive Approach to Brailling Errors.
A Survey of Assistive Technology and Teacher Preparation Programs for Individuals with Visual Impairments.
Calendar.
Mental Effort in Mobility Route Learning.
The Need for Health Promotion for Adults Who Are Visually Impaired.
Expanding Understanding of Emergent Literacy: Empirical Support for a New Framework.
Comparing the Effects of Congenital and Late Visual Impairments on Visuospatial Mental Abilities.
Effectiveness of the Ticket to Work Program for Beneficiaries Who Are Blind or Have Low Vision: Comparisons with Other Beneficiaries.
MySchoolDayOnline: Applying Universal Design Principles to the Development of a Fully Accessible Online Scheduling Tool for Students with Visual Impairments.
People.
Nature that Won't Nurture: How Ideology Can Thwart Early Intervention for Young Children with Vision Loss and the Response That's Needed.
Social Skills Intervention for a Child Who Is Blind.
Analysis of Phonemes, Graphemes, Onset-Rimes, and Words with Braille-Learning Children.
Literary Wanderings.
The Truths of Dirty Fingernails.
Free to Commercial Fisherwomen.
In Search of Theory and Method in American Indian Studies.
Economic Development and Technology-Skill Needs on American Indian Reservations.
THE PROLIFERATION OF WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION: EGYPT.
FOR WATER ALONE: A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF TAWFIQ ABU WA'IL'S FILM 'A TASH AND MUHAMMAD SHUKRI'S AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL NOVELS AL-KHUBZ AL-HAFI AND AL-SHUTTAR.
IMPACT OF POPULATION VARIABLES ON HEALTH SERVICES DEMAND AND PROVISION IN THE UNITED ARAB EMIRATES.
NEOLIBERALISM, CONFLICT AND AN OIL ECONOMY: THE CASE OF IRAQ.
THE PORTRAYAL OF ARABS IN TEXTBOOKS IN THE JEWISH SCHOOL SYSTEM IN ISRAEL.
UNDERSTANDING KEFAYA: THE NEW POLITICS IN EGYPT.
The United States, Iraq, and the War on Terror.
The Clash of Emotions.
Fidel's Final Victory.
Saving Afghanistan.
A Battle for Global Values.
Hands Off Hedge Funds.
Has Globalization Passed Its Peak?
The Faces of Chinese Power.
Negotiating With Terrorists.
The New Hegemony.
KAZAKHSTAN: Greater, Higher, Further: Transporting the Future.
Iraq's Civil War.
Time for Détente With Iran.
China's Space Odyssey.
Smooth Sailing.
Ending the Trade War in Washington.
Al Qaeda Strikes Back. (cover story)
How Biofuels Could Starve the Poor.
Healthy Old Europe.
Containing Russia.
The End of National Currency.
Bush and the Generals.
Let Women Rule.
The Old Turks' Revolt.
An Enduring Peace Built on Freedom. (cover story)
Security and Opportunity for the Twenty-first Century.
Losing Russia. (cover story)
Can the War on Terror Be Won? (cover story)
A Disciplined Defense. (cover story)
Washington's Eastern Sunset.
Winning Asia.
Toward a Realistic Peace.
Reengaging With the World.
Salute and Disobey?
Food for Fuel?
The Impact of Television on Georgia, 1948-1952.
The Plight of a Georgia Loyalist: William Lyford, Jr.
A Cotton Kingdom Retooled for War: The Macon Arsenal and the Confederate Ordnance Establishment.
The Workers of Chicopee: Progressive Paternalism and the Culture of Accommodation in a Modern Mill Village.
Annual Report of the Georgia Historical Society for Fiscal Year 2007.
Georgia History in Pictures.
Recently Processed Manuscript Collections at the Georgia Historical Society.
The British Sailors' Advocate: James Oglethorpe's First Philanthropic Venture.
The Georgia &; Florida Railroad and Wiregrass Agriculture.
Overcoming the "Defect of Sex": Georgia Women's Fight for Access to Jury Service.
Sir Joseph Jekyll and his Impact on Oglethorpe's Georgia.
Scottish Merchants and the Shaping of Colonial Georgia.
The Impact of the Western & Atlantic Railroad on the Development of the Georgia Upcountry, 1840-1860.
Georgia and the Conversation over Indian Removal.
I lead you to battle: Joseph E. Johnston and the Controversy at Cassville.
Complex Relations: An African-American Attorney Navigates Jim Crow Atlanta.
Georgia History in Pictures.
Other Books Received.
Peace or Jihad? Abrogation in Islam.
Should Muslims Integrate into the West?
Has Hezbollah's Rise Come at Syria's Expense?
Are Muslim Countries Less Democratic?
Can There Be an Islamic Democracy?
My Cyber Counter-jihad.
Palestinians, Jebusites, and Evangelicals.
How Israel Bungled the Second Lebanon War.
Alexandr Vondra: "Radical Islam Poses a Major Challenge to Europe".
Jihad's New Leaders.
Deciphering Ahmadinejad's Holocaust Revisionism.
Iraqi Kurdistan's Downward Spiral.
Is Iraq in a Civil War?
Culture in Post-Saddam Iraq.
Can the PKK Renounce Violence?
Arab Politics: Back to Futility.
The End of Israeli Military Restraint.
The Kurdish Case.
The Turkoman Case.
After the Danish Cartoon Controversy.
Could Sanctions Work against Tehran?
Russia and the Middle East.
Is Female Genital Mutilation an Islamic Problem?
Iran's Suicide Brigades.
Venice and Contemporary African Art.
Come and Try..
The Menil Collection.
Parlor Illusions.
Cultural Heritage in the Work of Two Xhosa-speaking Ceramic Artists.
Inscribing Meaning.
Marks of Identity.
Containers of Life.
Namsifueli Nyeki.
Metaphors, Myths and Making Pots.
Forty Years of African Arts.
On Ouidah Asen.
A CURATOR'S PERSPECTIVE.
Early Ceramics from Calabar, Nigeria.
Building a Digital Library of Scholarly Resources from the Developing World.
African Wave.
Hot Space, Cool Space.
The Thirtieth Anniversary of the Soweto Uprisings.
African Art, African Museums.
Decorated Hu Ronko Shirts from Northern Sierra Leone.
Giotto's Circumspection.
Localizing Sacredness, Difference, and Yachacuscamcani in a Colonial Andean Painting.
Realist Quandaries: Posing Professional and Proprietary Models in the 1860s.
Response: The Far in the Near.
Response: Reasons to Be Cheerful.
Interventions: The Author Replies.
Self-Promotion in Adélaide Labille-Guiard's 1785 Self-Portrait with Two Students.
Interventions: The Melancholy Art.
Response: Epithalamium.
Response: The Dark Side of Art History.
The Inka Married the Earth: Integrated Outcrops and the Making of Place.
Visualizing Appearance and Disappearance: On Caravaggio's London Supper at Emmaus.
Naive Impressions from Nature: Millet's Readings, from Montaigne to Charlotte Brontë.
Billy and Girl.
Mordechai Schamz.
Night.
Out of Focus.
The Queen of the Prisons of Greece.
A Short Rhetoric for Leaving the Family.
Things in the Night.
Flotsam & Jetsam.
Geometric Regional Novel.
The First Book of Grabinoulor.
Impossible Object.
Teitlebaum's Window.
Annihilation.
Castle Keep.
Chinese Letter.
Chromos.
TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION.
The Green Bird.
The Obedient Dog.
The Unicorn.
Papusa.
Pibesa.
The Hacienda La Cantera.
ONE YEAR.
Introduction: Special Focus on Music Teacher Preparation.
Considering Beliefs' in Learning to Teach Music.
Authentic Practice and Process in Music Teacher Education.
The Possibilities of Situated Learning for Teacher Preparation: The Professional Development Partnership.
Mentoring Preservice Teachers for Development and Growth of Professional Knowledge.
Teacher Modeling as an Effective Teaching Strategy.
Popular Music in School: Remixing the Issues.
The Composers' Workshop: An Approach to Composing in the Classroom.
Preparing for a Guest Clinician's Rehearsal with Your Choir.
Understanding the Music Curriculum in the International Baccalaureate Program.
Extending the Vision: Three Women Who Saw the Future of Music Education.
Promoting Vocal Health in the Choral Rehearsal.
Perspectives on the Music Program: Opening Doors to the School Community.
Mentoring Student Teachers in the Music Classroom.
Lessons from the Bandstand: Using Jazz as a Model for a Constructivist Approach to Music Education.
Teaching Chinese Folk Songs with an Authentic Approach.
Between Research and Practice: How Choral Music Loses Boys in the "Middle".
We've Got the Whole Tune in Our Hands.
Music Education at the Tipping Point.
What Are Music Educators Doing and How Well Are We Doing It?
The Four Cs of Successful Classroom Management.
Guidelines for Guest Conductors of Honor Choirs.
American Idol and the Music Classroom: A Means of Critiquing Music.
MENC in International Perspective.
Some Recent Italian Poems.
Italian Poetry Today: New Ways to Break the Line.
Number Me Among the Almonds.
Does Poetry Have a Social Function?
The Poem and its Secret.
Beach Reading.
The Great Man.
The Kareem In My Ca-Va-Fe.
THE RACES OF WOMEN: GENDER, HYBRIDITY, AND NATIONAL IDENTITY IN DINAH CRAIK'S OLIVE.
THE INVISIBLE GIANT, DRACULA, AND DISEASE.
THE PERSPECTIVE OF THE LOOK IN THE INTROSPECTIVE AND TRUTH-QUEST NOVEL.
DIFFERENCE AND REPETITION IN AUSTEN'S PERSUASION.
WORTHY AMBITION : RELIGION AND DOMESTICITY IN THE DAISY CHAIN.
MODERNISM AND THE CONTOURS OF VIOLENCE IN D. H. LAWRENCE'S FICTION.
NOVELTY IN NOVELS: A LOOK AT WHAT'S NEW IN APHRA BEHN'S OROONOKO.
JOSEPH ANDREWS AND THE CONTROL OF THE POOR.
MORE THAN A GRAVESTONE: CALEB WILLIAMS, UDOLPHO, AND THE POLITICS OF THE GOTHIC.
DALLYING WITH DAILINESS: AMIT CHAUDHURI'S FLÂNEUR FICTIONS.
A Death Sentence Is Brought to Mind.
The Secrets of Million Dollar Solos.
RETIRED, THEN RE-ENERGIZED.
The Youngest Clients.
ABA Announces Nominations.
REBUILDING PROJECT.
You're NOT the Boss of Me.
Erosion of Trust.
Violation or Salvation?
Following the Beat of the Ban.
New Name, NEW Strategies.
E-DISCOVERY GETS REAL.
Forces of Change.
Strange New World.
Adding Light Motifs.
New Theories of Evolution.
Re-engineering the J.D.
MORTGAGE Fraud Mess.
The High Court's Danish Prince.
COACH ME. (cover story)
Collaring the Clergy.
Judge v. Jury.
Decline & Fall.
UP IN SMOKE. (cover story)
A TANGLED TRAIL of DISCOVERY.
BATTLING BRIBERY ABROAD.
ROUGH JUSTICE.
Crisis Pending.
You're Fired.
MOUSSAOUI v. THE UNITED STATES.
RISING FROM THE RUBBLE.
LOCAL RELIGIOUS PEACEMAKERS: AN UNTAPPED RESOURCE IN U.S. FOREIGN POLICY.
ISLAMIC JUST WAR THEORY AND THE CHALLENGE OF SACRED SPACE IN IRAQ.
THE CHURCHES' CONTRIBUTION TO CITIZENSHIP IN BRAZIL.
PUTIN AND THE RUSSIAN ORTHODOX CHURCH: ASYMMETRIC SYMPHONIA?
OUTWITTING THE DEVELOPED COUNTRIES? EXISTENTIAL INSECURITY AND THE GLOBAL RESURGENCE OF RELIGION.
RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION: A WORLD SURVEY.
RELIGIONS AND INTERNATIONAL POVERTY ALLEVIATION: THE PLUSES AND MINUSES.
WHAT RELIGION BRINGS TO THE POLITICS OF TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE.
EDITORS' FORWARD.
DOMESTIC TRIBULATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL REPERCUSSIONS: THE STATE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF NON-MUSLIMS IN IRAN.
TACKLING THE IRAN-U.S. CRISIS: THE NEED FOR A PARADIGM SHIFT.
REDISCOVERING CONTAINMENT: THE SOURCES OF AMERICAN-IRANIAN CONDUCT.
THE NUCLEAR PLAYERS.
A NUCLEAR IRAN: PROMOTING STABILITY OR COURTING DISASTER?
IRAN'S REGIONAL POLICY: BETWEEN RADICALISM AND PRAGMATISM.
THE IRANIAN SPECTACLE: AN ISTANBUL DISPATCH.
THE SHANGHAI COOPERATION ORGANIZATION AND IRAN: A POWER-FULL UNION.
IRAN BETWEEN EAST AND WEST.
IRANIAN WOMEN'S STATUS AND STRUGGLES SINCE 1979.
THE AHMADINEJAD ERA: PREPARING FOR THE APOCALYPSE.
THE RIGHT TO BE PRESENT BEFORE MILITARY COMMISSIONS AND FEDERAL COURTS: PROTECTING NATIONAL SECURITY IN AN AGE OF CLASSIFIED INFORMATION.
IF YOU (RE)BUILD IT, THEY WILL COME: CONTRACTS TO REMAKE THE RULES OF LITIGATION IN ARBITRATION'S IMAGE.
WOULD BANNING FIREARMS REDUCE MURDER AND SUICIDE?
MAJORITARIAN DEMOCRACY IN A FEDERALIST SYSTEM: THE LATE CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST AND THE FIRST AMENDMENT.
Ramipril did not reduce incident diabetes in patients with impaired glycemic control.
Review: Low-dose aspirin causes a small increase in gastrointestinal bleeding.
Review: Long-acting ß&lt;sub&gt;2&lt;/sub&gt;-adrenoceptor agonists are effective in poorly reversible chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Making sense of diagnostic test likelihood ratios.
The evolving science of translating research evidence into clinical practice.
PURPOSE AND PROCEDURE.
Incidental Diagnosis Of Sphenoid Meningioma After Spinal Anaesthesia.
Anaesthetic Management Of A Case Of Hypertrophic Obstructive Cardiomyopathy For Non Cardiac Surgery.
Provocative Challenge Testing And Subsequent Successful Epidural Analgesia In A Morbidly Obese Patient With Known Local Anaesthetic Hypersensitivity.
Unique Presentation Of Epiglottis In Corrosive Poisoning: A Case Report.
Anaesthetic Management For Total Hip Replacement In A Case Of Ankylosing Spondylitis.
Is Dexmedetomidine A Useful Adjunct For Awake Intubation In Retropharyngeal Neurofibromatosis?
Managing Airway In Dohlmann's Procedure Using Carbon Dioxide Laser By An Innovative Method.
Labour Analgesia In A Patient With Complete Heart Block.
A Comparative Study Between Fentanyl - Midazolam With Pentazocine - Promethazine For Conscious Sedation During Cardiac Catheterization.
Dog Immunotherapy Practices among Allergists.
Airway Remodeling May Avoid The Accented Oscillation Of Reduced Lung Functions Among Asthmatics.
Protracted diarrhea associated with eosinophilia in an HIV infected patient.
Knowledge, Attitudes And Practices (KAP) Of Primary Care Physicians Of Central Mumbai Suburbs About Childhood Asthma.
Visual Quality Control Of Gated Myocardial Perfusion Spect.
Age and Sex: Important Determinants In Affecting The Levels Of Serum Apolipoprotein B And A1 In Indian Population.
Effect of Simvastatin and Atorvastatin on Coenzyme Q10.
A Comparison of Strategies for Summing Gated Myocardial Perfusion SPECT: Are False Negatives a Potential Problem?
Isolated large atrial septal aneurysm and multiple cerebral infarcts: Is there any association?
Late Stent Thrombosis Following Implantation of a Drug Eluting Stent Presenting as Acute Myocardial Infarction: A Case Report.
Slow Flow Phenomenon During Renal Angioplasty: Does It Have the Same Predictors and Treatment as Coronary Angioplasty?
Correlation of Chronotropic Index and Heart Rate Recovery to Heart Rate Variability and Diastolic Function Values in Men.
Association between Recent Group A Beta-Hemolytic.
Fatal Outcome of Infective Endocarditis in a Pregnant Marfan Woman.
Cartilaginous and Osseous Metaplasia in the Aortic Valve.
Role of Transesophageal Echocardiography in Assessment of Penetrating Heart Trauma.
A Case Report of "Tako-tsubo-like" Syndrome.
Congenital Absence of Pericardium and Straight Back Syndrome: Do They Have Similarities?
Angina with Normal Epicardial Coronary Arteries: Does Gender Imply any Difference in Ischemia Detection?
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation.
Healing Touch.
Innovative Solutions: Leading the Way.
A Grief Team Within a Healthcare System.
Barriers to Achieving Patient-Centered Care In Ireland.
Leaving Critical Care: Facilitating a Smooth Transition.
An Overview of Mitral Valve Prolapse.
A Transdisciplinary Team Acting on Evidence Through Analyses of Moot Malpractice Cases.
Using Computer Screen Savers to Enhance Nurses Learning in the Intensive Care Environment.
Increased Job Satisfaction After Small Group Reflection on an Intensive Care Unit.
Acute Iron Poisoning: What Every Pediatric Intensive Care Unit Nurse Should Know.
Innovative Solutions: A Plurality of Vision.
Caring for the Incarcerated in the Intensive Care Unit.
Promotion of Family Integrity in the Acute Care Setting.
A Blueprint for Developing an Undergraduate Critical Care Nursing Course.
Clinical Research and the Development of New Devices.
Blood Pressure and Risks of Vascular Complications After Percutaneous Coronary Intervention.
Patch Testing In Cosmetic Dermatoses: A Report From South India.
Evaluation of incidence of Non-Melanoma skin cancers in Esfahan.
Skin Colonization With Staphylococcus Aureus In Patients With Atopic Dermatitis.
Verrucous Carcinoma Arising In A Chronic Non-Healing Ulcer Of The Foot Of A Diabetic Patient.
Diagnostic dilemma: HMB-45 and Melan-A negative tumor, can it be still a melanoma?: MITF (Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor) stain may confirm the diagnosis.
Metronidazole Induced Bullous Fixed Drug Eruptions: A Case Report And A Review Of Literature.
Drug Induced Macucopapular Rash With The Commonly Used First Line Antitubercular Drug, Pyrazinamide.
Mycosis Fungoides Of The Tongue.
Bacterial Infection within a Rheumatoid Nodule: A Rarely Reported Finding.
Dermatophytes and Other Fungi Associated with Hair-Scalp of Nursery and Primary School Children in Awka, Nigeria.
Evaluation Of Diagnostic Skills Of Interns Electively Rotating At The Dermatology Department Of King Fahad Hospital Of The University In Alkhobar, Saudi Arabia.
The Prevalence Of Acne Vulgaris In Secondary School Students In YaoundÃ(c), Cameroon.
Disseminated Granuloma Annulare Associated With Ulcerative Colitis.
Concurrent Merkel cell carcinoma and Bowen's disease of the thigh.
Alopecia Areata preceding Mycosis Fungoides.
Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum-like Syndrome: Report of a Case and Discussion of Pathogenesis.
Malignant Atrophic Papulosis.
A brief review of the "vulgaris" lesions of the skin.
Treatment of psoriasis with zinc sulphate cream 2.5% in comparison with clobetasol propionate cream.
Distribution Of Jewish And Non-Jewish Haplotypes Among Pemphigus Vulgaris Patients Worldwide.
Vascular leak syndrome with pleural effusions following treatment with denileukin diftitox for mycosis fungoides.
Multiple Endocrine Syndrome Type 2B Associated with Keloids.
Inflammatory Pseudotumor of the Skin: A Case Report And Review Of The Literature.
Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the temporal bone.
Cerebrospinal fluid otorrhea presenting in complicated chronic suppurative otitis media.
A new method for closure of small to medium-size nasoseptal perforations.
Comparisons of Mosquito Populations Before and After Construction of a Wetland for Water Quality Improvement in Pitt County, North Carolina, and Data-Reliant Vectorborne Disease Management.
Veterinarians and Environmental Health Practitioners: Partners in Prevention.
A Legal History of Raw Milk in the United States.
Products & Services.
Health, Safety, and Ecological Implications of Using Biobased Floor-Stripping Products.
Beliefs, knowledge and attitudes of community-dwelling Greek elders towards influenza and pneumococcal vaccination.
Effects of Combined Treatment with Alendronate and Alfacalcidol on Bone Mineral Density and Bone Turnover in Postmonopausal Osteoporosis: A two-years, randomized, multiarm, controlled trial.
Relationship Between Dental Caries And Oral Hygiene Status Of 8 To 12 Year Old School Children.
Pattern of Breastfeeding and its impact on Post-Partum Amenorrhoea: A cross-sectional study.
Application Of Self-Organizing Maps For Prioritization Of Malaria Control Operations In Changlang District, Arunachal Pradesh.
General and Maternal Health Status of Rural Women in Bangladesh: A Descriptive Study from Two Remote Villages.
Road Traffic Accidents: Site Of Fracture Of The Mandible.
Disease-Related Parenting Stress in Two Sickle Cell Disease Caregiver Samples: Preschool and Adolescent.
An Exploration of the Marital Relationship and Alzheimer's Disease: One Couple's Story.
Anthropometry in Forensic Medicine and Forensic Science-'Forensic Anthropometry'.
Bite Marks: A new Identification Technique.
Determination Of Sex From The Foot Measurements.
Determination Of Foetal Age: Bizygomatic Width And Nasion To Prosthion Distance.
Extended Study of Pitch Shifted Speech by Preserving Tempo: An Experimental Study.
Forensic Detection Of Fire Accelerants Using A New Solid Phase Microextraction (SPME) Fiber.
The Potential of HUMACTBP2 (SE33) as a DNA Screening Locus.
Role of Forensic Odontology in Tsunami Disasters.
North American And European Health Care Workers Traveling To Countries Highly Endemic For Hepatitis A: Information And Recommendations.
Duodenal Varices: A Rare Manifestation of Portal Hypertension.
The Addition Of Subtraction In Scintigraphy: A Role In The Evaluation Of Git Bleed.
Esophageal Cancer: Presentation With Unusual Bone Metastases And Review Of Relevant Literature.
Early Buried Bumper Syndrome.
Correlation Between Ultrasound Findings And Ultrasound Guided-Fine Needle Aspiration Cytology In The Diagnosis Of Hepatic Lesions.
Ventilator Associated Pneumonia.
Higher Risk Of Recurrence And Death From Clostridium difficile Infection After Initial Therapy With Metronidazole.
Significant Upper Gi âe" Bleeding In Critically Ill Patients.
Management of Ascites.
Interferons Play a Central Role in the Natural Defense and Therapeutic Management of Hepatitis C.
Depression Leading to Suicide As An Adverse Effect of Metoclopramide.
Fascioliasis In Cukurova Region, Turkey.
Cirrhosis Of Liver Presenting As Acute Right Sided Pleural Effusion.
Hypochrom Microcytic Anemia In Northwestern Of Tabriz, Iran.
Haematological Profile of Male Rats Treated with Ethanol and/ or Chloroquine and fed Normal or Low Protein Diet.
Zoster-Related Pain In Haematological Malignancies: Durable Pain Relief Provided By Oxycodone In Patients Unresponsive To Standard Therapy.
An Exploratory Study of Local Food Affordability and Factors Related to Household Food Security and Food Purchasing Decisions.
Clinical aspects of tuberculosis with directly observed treatment in Mehsana district India.
Attitudes And Barriers Towards Smoking Cessation Among Middle Aged And Elderly Women: A Qualitative Study In Family Practice.
Impact of a Short Term Intervention on Health Care Outreach to a Marginal Population in Rural North India.
Does Knowledge of Hazards of Exposure to Noise Change Attitudes and Translate Into Healthful Practices?
Human Clone: Who Is Related To Whom.
Assisted Reproductive Techniques Ethical And Legal Concerns.
Is Any Factor Influence On Hepatitis B Vaccination Response In Hemodialysis Patients?
Sclerosis Of Large Renal Cyst With Improved Hypertension: Case Report.
Atheroembolic Renal Disease In A Potentially High Risk Patient.
Estimation of Serum and Urinary Profibrotic Cytokines in Renal Allograft Recipients.
Predicting Costs Of Care In Chronic Kidney Disease.
Pituitary Adenomas: Patterns Of Visual Presentation And Outcome After Transsphenoidal Surgery - An Institutional Experience.
Central Serous Chorioretinopathy Associated with Chronic Dermal Camphor Application.
Descemet's Stripping And Endothelial Keratoplasty For Pseudophakic Bullous Keratopathy: Simplified Manual Donor Dissection Without An Artificial Anterior Chamber.
A Leadership Competency Model: Guiding NAON Processes.
Tibia Fractures: An Overview of Evaluation and Treatment.
Assistive Devices for the Adult Patient With Orthopaedic Dysfunction.
Osteoporosis Knowledge, Health Beliefs, and DXA T-Scores in Men and Women 50 Years of Age and Older.
The Use of Handheld Technology in Nursing Research and Practice.
Hip Arthroplasty.
Medicating Young or Very Young Patients--Part II.
A Potpourri of Topics.
Psychosocial Factors Affecting Hip Fracture Elder's Burden of Care in Taiwan.
Update on Therapy for Osteoporosis.
A Randomized Trial to Evaluate Compliance in Terms of Patient Comfort and Satisfaction of Two Pneumatic Compression Devices.
Pathogenesis of Tendon Rupture Secondary to Fluoroquinolone Therapy.
Personal Health Record: New Opportunity for Patient Education.
Bony Entrapment Of Ulnar Nerve After Closed Forearm Fracture.
Weight Bearing Capability Of An Antibiotic Loaded Pre-Formed Articulated Knee Spacer: A Case Report.
Stress Fracture Of The Supracondylar Region Of The Femur Induced By The Weight Of The Tibial Ring Fixator.
Bilateral Symmetrical Radial Head Fractures: A Case Report.
Prognosis Of Spinal Tuberculosis.
Periprosthetic Femur fractures in Octogenarians: Are plating systems the Answer?
Use of Electroacupuncture for Treatment of Chronic Sciatic Pain.
Ondansetron for Treating Itch in Healing Burns.
Pain Management in Cancer.
Differentiation of Meningiomas from Histologic Mimics Via the Use of Claudin-1.
Assessment Of Correlation Between Clinicopathological Features And Lymph Node Metastases In Breast Cancer.
Prognostic Value Of hMLH1 And hMSH2 Immunohistochemical Expression In Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
Clinical And Histopathologic Study Of Surgically Excised Mitral Valves In Children.
Diagnostic Application Of Mean Nuclear Area (MNA) Measured By Computerized Interactive Morphometry In Breast Cancer.
Sebaceous Carcinoma Of The Nasal Vestibule:A Case Report.
Ancient Schwannoma Of The Nasal Cavity, A Rare Cause Of Nasal Obstruction: A Review And Case Report.
Gastric Heterotopia of the Rectum: A Case Report.
Umbilical Sinus: Case Report Of A Rare Malformation With A Brief Insight Into The Other Vitellointestinal Duct Anomalies.
Prognostic Value Of hMLH1 And hMSH2 Immunohistochemical Expression In Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
Ancient Schwannoma Of The Nasal Cavity, A Rare Cause Of Nasal Obstruction: A Review And Case Report.
Umbilical Sinus: Case Report Of A Rare Malformation With A Brief Insight Into The Other Vitellointestinal Duct Anomalies.
Septic Emboli with an epidural abscess.
Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis in an adult female patient.
Lung Cancer presenting as Pneumonia in Pregnancy.
Bilateral Nodular Pulmonary Tuberculosis Simulating Metastatic Lung Cancer.
Double primary non-small cell lung cancer: Pulmonary adenocarcinoma metastasizing into a synchronous typical carcinoid.
Comparison of the Effect of Short Course of Oral Prednisone in Patients with Acute Asthma.
Association Between Amount Of Smoking With Chronic Cough And Sputum Production.
Plasma Antiprotease Status in Different Respiratory Disorders.
Variability In The Interpretation Of Pulmonary Function Tests.
Pneumonia in Pregnancy: Pneumocystis Jiroveci Pneumonia.
Severe Cheyne-Stokes Respiration In An Awake Patient After Stroke.
Kikuchi's Disease With Pulmonary And Central Lymph Node Involvement: Rapid Response To Ciprofloxacin And Ceftazidime.
Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma Of The Trachea Treated As COPD.
Alveolar Oxygen And Carbon Dioxide Tensions During Pregnancy, Measured With A Novel Technique.
Studying the Effects of Inspiratory Muscle Training in Patients with Obstructive Lung Diseases.
Pulmonary Fungal Involvement in HIV-positive patients in an inner city hospital in New York.
Preliminary Evaluation Of Use Pattern Of Pneumococcal Vaccine In A Developing Country: A Study Of 24 Cases In A Tertiary Care Hospital In Nepal.
Clinical Features And Correlates Of Bacteremia Among Urban Minority New Yorkers Hospitalized With Community Acquired Pneumonia.
Alveolar Oxygen And Carbon Dioxide Tensions During Pregnancy, Measured With A Novel Technique\.
Diffuse pulmonary lymphangiomatosis in a 26-year-old man.
Utility of Total Face-mask in a COPD patient.
A Study Of Epidemiological Factors Related To Acute Respiratory Infection (ARI) In Under Five Children Attending The Immunization Clinic Of Calcutta National Medical College And Hospital.
Domestic Fire Accidents In A Developing Country: Reducing Morbidity / Mortality By Modifying The "Burglar Proofs".
Peripheral Neuropathy in Chemical Warfare Victims.
The Medical Management Of Bomb-Blast Scenes In The Emergency Department.
Planning Medical Care for High-Risk Mass Gatherings.
Immediate Psychological Support for Children after a Disaster: A Concept.
Difficult Airway Management Of A Patient With Myasthenia Gravis During Aeromedical Transportation.
Paraneoplastic Raynaud's phenomenon and Digital Ischaemia as a Presenting Feature of Underlying Malignancy.
Thoracic Spine Tuberculosis Presenting With Chronic Nausea And Abdominal Pain.
Evaluation of Cardiac Function in Systemic Sclerosis with Novel Echocardiographic Technologies.
Correlation Between CCP Levels And Health Assessment Questionnaire In Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Single Center Analysis.
Abatacept In Focus.
Usefulness of BCG reactivation in Incomplete Kawasaki Disease: A Case Series.
Recurrent Pneumothorax In A Patient With Rheumatoid Arthritis On Leflunomide Treatment: Case….
Strongyloides Stercoralis Infection Presenting With Severe Malabsorption And Arthritis In An Immune Competent Host.
Neurological Manifestations In A Patient With SLE Complicated By TTP: A Case Report.
Anasarca and Orophayngeal Myopathy: Unusual manifestations of Polymyositis.
Verification Of Biological Characteristics Of Resection Lines Of Colorectal Carcinoma By Quantitative Expression Of MRNA CEA And TIMP-1.
Comparative Evaluation Of Cardiff Repair And Mesh Plasty In Incisional Hernias.
The Results Of Maggot Debridement Therapy In The Ischemic Leg: A Study On 89 Patients With 89 Wounds On The Lower Leg Treated With Maggots.
Eosinophilic Cholecystitis: A Case Report.
Malignant Melanoma In Cameroon.
Chronic Leg Ulcer Presenting Through Emergency Surgical Unit.
Evaluation Of Alvarado Score In Acute Appendicitis: A Prospective Study.
Acute Aortic Occlusion: Time To Awake, Be Aware And Act.
Laparoscopic Surgery: What Is Scientifically Demonstrated At Present?
Synchronous Colonic Carcinomas.
Primary Non Hodgkin Lymphoma of the Breast.
Infected Urachal Remnant Causing Necrotizing Fasciitis of the Lower Abdominal Wall: Case Report and Review of Literature.
Late Mesh Extrusion In A Case Of Incisional Hernia Repaired With Polypropelene Mesh.
Cutaneous Myofibromatosis Masquerading As A Chronic Non Healing Leg Ulcer.
The Influence Of Maternal Socio-Economic And Nutritional Status On Foetal Malnutrition In Nigeria.
Sociocultural Impediments To The Use Of Amniotic Membranes In South Western Nigeria.
A Comparative Study of Extra-Amniotic Instillation of Normal Saline versus Ethacridine Lactate for Induction of Labour in Antepartum Fetal Death.
Record-Based Immunization Coverage Assessment in Rural North India.
Tuberculosis Of The Spine In Nigeria: Has Anything Changed?
Soil-Transmitted Helminth Infection In School Children In South-Eastern Nigeria: The Public Health Implication.
The Importance Of Preparation: An Examination Of The Principle Health Concerns Encountered On A Medical Relief Mission To Central Honduras With Implications For Future Relief Missions.
A Case Study In Support Of Carotid Endarterectomy Under Local Anesthesia.
Migrated Kirschner Wires In The Mediastinum: A Case Report And Review Of The Literature.
Left Atrial Myxoma Presenting with Acute Pancreatitis.
Succesful Embolization Of A Post-Mediastinitis False Aortic Aneurysm.
A Note To Cardiothoracic Surgeons: Statins Can Interact With Ciprofloxacillin And Fusidic Acid To Cause Rhabdomyolysis And Myoglobinuric Renal Failure.
Comparison Of Epidural Fentanyl And Intravenous Pethidine For Post-Thoracotomy Analgesia.
Minimally Invasive Excision of Cystic Thymomas.
An Unusual Penetrating Neck Trauma In Zone III.
Vertebral Tuberculosis Mimicking Malign Vertebral And Spinal Cord Tumors.
Unusual Intrapulmonary And Intramyocardial Foreign Body.
Branchial Cyst.
Right Heart Free-Floating Thrombus In A Patient With History Of Breast Cancer.
Two Cases WÄ±th Giant Tumor In A Rare LocatÄ±on At The Anterior Chest Wall.
At Last, a Tribunal for Khmer Rouge Atrocities.
Unto Caesar.
The Trojan War.
Lady of the Lake.
Good Thing Going.
Death on the Installment Plan.
Gazing into the Abyss.
Fragments of Paradise.
Arthur of Camelot.
The Short Reign of Fred Allen.
Chasing the Blues Away.
The Mystery of Ales.
Love on Campus.
Remember Statecraft?
Fired: Can a friendship really end for no good reason?
The Ballad in the Street: Listening for the muffled strains of a national culture.
The Edgy Optimist: At 76, saxist Sonny Rollins is still on top of his game.
When Maestros Were Maestros: Innovator, mentor, tyrant, Leopold Stokowski brought real joy to music making.
Going Native: When American literature became good enough for Americans, what happened to the literary canon?
An Educated Guess: Who knew that mixing the intelligent and the idosyncratic would yield a long life for a certain small quarterly?
Not Compassionate, Not Conservative: A political traditionalist critiques our pseudo-conservative president.
Scooter and Me: Professing liberal doubt in an age of fundamentalist fervor.
Fear of Falling: Working in the mop-and-bucket brigade in college created the perspectives of a lifetime.
The Literary Review and Its Founders.
From My Notes About My Mother.
Halfway to Hell: Williams Carlos Williams' Kora in Hell.
It was … civilization I was after: George Tice, William Carlos Williams, and the Archaeology of Paterson.
Traduttore.
Villanelle.
Walking Tour, an excerpt from the play Middletown.
The Book of Panegyrics.
Tastes Like Regular.
The Devil in Norman Mailer.
Burgess.
case sensitive.
Cadenza for the Schneidermann Violin Concerto.
Correspondence.
Overture.
Annunciation.
Greetings from Hollywood, 1979.
Nullified by Noticing.
The Undefil'd Bed: Reflections on Milton and the Image of Marriage.
The Academy.
In Praise of Darkness.
Through a Frame.
Perpetual Calendar.
Balboa.
Ivy Miller Poses.
Me and Myopia.
What to Do with the Dead.
Are You There.
Détente at the Flying Horse.
From Mossbawn to Meliboeus: Seamus Heaney's Ambivalent Pastoralism.
The Palmer Method: Penmanship and the Tenor of Our Time.
The Idea Man.
Rods and Cones.
Cañonicity.
The Gift of Distance.
White Bull.
Suck It.
Privacy, Babel, Doors.
Time to Kill: Cambodia.
harry potter and the goblet of motivation.
2007: best, notable, & recommended.
north of 49: resource links best of 2006.
play me a story: games based on children's books.
more tips and tactics.
Podcasting in the school library, part 2: creating powerful Podcasts with your students.
children, teens, and the construction of information spaces.
new online technologies for new literacy instruction.
teacher-librarian as literacy leader.
assignments worth the effort: questions are key.
the healing picture book: an aesthetic of sorrow.
building a multicultural school library: issues and challenges.
if you build it, they will come: creating a school library that embraces students and teachers.
Podcasting in the school library, part 1: integrating Podcasts and vodcasts into teaching and learning.
BOOKMARKIT.
making the school library sticky: digital libraries build teacher-librarians' strategic implementation content knowledge in science.
research and school libraries: knowing the basic sources.
the components of successful technologies.
the hero's journey: an inquiry-research model.
making it real: bringing historical fiction alive.
iPods and English-language learners: a great combination.
students as library leaders: student team builds leadership skills while helping to battle budget cuts.
an information skills workout: wikis and collaborative writing.
great educational and fun web sites to explore during the summer.
increasing literacy in the high school library: collaboration makes it happen.
you know you're a 21st-century teacher-librarian if….
are librarians totally obsolete? 33 reasons why libraries and librarians are still extremely important.
how I learned to run a really popular book club (and what I learned about its effect on students' reading skills and attitude).
video and the Web, part 1: more the flickers on the screen.
fostering content area literacy.
graduating students who are not only learned but also learners.
Bruce Manning Metzger.
Doublet Catchwords in the Leningrad Codex.
Some Witnesses Have…: The Representation of the New Testament Text in English Bible Versions.
From Peoplehood to Church Membership: Mormonism's Trajectory since World War II.
The Lives and Literary Roles of Children in Advancing Conversion to Christianity: Hagiography from the Caucasus in Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages.
Agnes of Harcourt, Felipa of Porcelet, and Marguerite of Oingt: Women Writing about Women at the End of the Thirteenth Century.
My Lord's Native Land: Mapping the Christian Holy Land.
From Black Magic to Heresy: A Doctrinal Leap in the Pontificate of John XXII.
The Power of Books and the Practice of Mysticism in the Fourteenth Century: Heinrich of Nördlingen and Margaret Ebner on Mechthild's Flowing Light of the Godhead.
Inventing the Catholic Worker Family.
Preparing the Soil for Global Revival: Station HCJB's Radio Circle, 1949-59.
Hilary and the Homoiousians: Using New Categories to Map the Trinitarian Controversy.
Mission Delayed: The Russian Orthodox Church after the Conquest of Kazan'.
Ritual Time in British Plantation Colonies, 1650-1780.
The Flame of Life Was Kindled in All Animal and Sensitive Creatures: One Quaker Colonist's View of Animal Life.
DISSECTING A BREAKTHROUGH.
Down But Not Out: The Religious Right and Election '06.
A Knife to the Heart.
Miseducation: The Lowdown on Abstinence-Only Sex-Ed Programs.
Alliance of Civilizations Final Report: Outlining a Holistic Approach.
Sandinista Redux.
ENCOURAGING SCIENCE.
A "Catholic Bloc" at The Supreme Court?
America's Strategically Debilitating Torture Posture.
America the Beautiful's Germ Warfare Rash.
Why My Dog Is Not a Humanist.
Faith in Hiding: Are There Secular Grounds for Banning Abortion?
The Bishop, the Statesman, and the Wren Cross: A Lesson in American Secularism.
A Mormon President?
The Surge: Moral Waivers and Legal Triage.
Slamming the Courthouse Door on Church-State Cases?
Universal Jurisdiction and the Bush Administration.
The Continued Concern of Scientists.
The Long Game. (cover story)
RELIGION AND THE LIBERAL ARTS EDUCATION.
The Art of Humanism.
Putting an End to "Teacher-Preachers" in Public Schools.
A Crowded But Empty Tomb.
Stark's Reason: How a California Congressman Became the Most Honest Person in Politics.
THE DARK AGES OF SOCIAL SCIENCE.
Grace and Goodwill: The Ballad of Eric-Uncle and Rev. Jey.
Uneven Terrain: A Peace Corps Farmer in Paraguay Follows the Contours.
FROM CHEERLEADER TO ENEMY OF THE STATE.
How to Counter Religion's Toxic Effects.
EXQUISITE COMPLEXITY REVISITING STEPHEN JAY GOULD.
HUMANISM AND ITS DISCONTENTS.
THE ENVIRONMENT AND THE NEW HUMANISM.
The Humanist Interview: Robin Morgan, 2007 Humanist Heroine.
The Real Legacy of the Reverend Jerry Falwell.
The Target.
THE RIGHT TO RELIGIOUS EXPRESSION AT THE AIR FORCE ACADEMY. (cover story)
The One True Religion in the Military.
Can Meditation Be Bad for You?
Driving Home: 4 Steps Toward Minimizing Global Warming and Achieving Energy Independence.
The Rise of Christian Nationalism.
COMPETE OR COOPERATE? ENDORSE, IGNORE, OR OPPOSE?
OPPOSITIONAL PAIRS AND CHRISTOLOGICAL SYNTHESIS: REREADING AUGUSTINE'S DE TRINITATE.
THEOLOGY, METAPHYSICS, AND THE CENTRALITY OF CHRIST.
CHARITY, NOT JUSTICE, AS CONSTITUTIVE OF THE CHURCH'S MISSION.
THEOLOGY AND ABORIGINAL RELIGION: CONTINUING "THE WIDER ECUMENISM.".
THE NONVOWED FORM OF THE LAY STATE IN THE LIFE OF THE CHURCH.
SANCTIFYING GRACE IN A "METHODICAL THEOLOGY.".
VEILED AND UNVEILED BEAUTY: THE ROLE OF THE IMAGINATION IN AUGUSTINE'S ESTHETICS.
EXEGESIS OF BIBLICAL THEOPHANIES IN BYZANTINE HYMNOGRAPHY: REWRITTEN BIBLE?
REMEMBERING THE HISTORIC JESUS--A NEW RESEARCH PROGRAM?
IMAGES OF GOD AND THE IMITATION OF GOD: PROBLEMS WITH ATONEMENT.
THE SYNTHESIS OF ALL HERESIES--100 YEARS ON.
HOMO THEOLOGICUS: TOWARD A REFLEXIVE THEOLOGY (WITH THE HELP OF PIERRE BOURDIEU).
AS LONG AS WE WONDER: POSSIBILITIES IN THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF INTERRELIGIOUS DIALOGUE.
FROM STATEMENTS TO PARABLES: RETHINKING PLURALIST IDENTITIES.
THE JOHANNINE LOGIC OF AUGUSTINE'S TRINITY: A DOGMATIC SKETCH.
Ghosts in Our Midst: Coming to Terms with Amphibian Extinctions.
Return of the Pronghorn.
Understanding Regional Change: A Comparison of Two Lake Districts.
The Significance of the Erosion-induced Terrestrial Carbon Sink.
Tales from the Blackgum, a Consummate Subordinate Tree. (cover story)
The Ascent of NESCent.
What Is Migration? (cover story)
Cannery Row Revisited.
Constructing a Broader and More Inclusive Value System in Science.
AIBS news.
Building EDENs: The Rise of Environmentally Distributed Ecological Networks.
Employing Philosophical Dialogue in Collaborative Science.
Running Hot and Cold: Are Rainforests Sinks or Taps for Carbon?
Patterns and Power of Phenotypic Selection in Nature.
Marine Ecoregions of the World: A Bioregionalization of Coastal and Shelf Areas.
Detective Work in the West Indies: Integrating Historical and Experimental Approaches to Study Island Lizard Evolution.
Watersheds and Coral Reefs: Conservation Science, Policy, and Implementation.
Revisiting Chamberlin: Multiple Working Hypotheses for the 21st Century.
Crocodile Tears: And thei eten hem wepynge.
The Cost Implications of Open-access Publishing in the Life Sciences.
AIBS news.
Decrypting Biofuel Scenarios.
Interactions and Linkages among Ecosystems during Landscape Evolution.
Out of Africa: A Tale of Gorillas, Heart Disease... and a Swamp Plant.
AIBS news.
DRY. (cover story)
A DIALOGUE, NOT A DIATRIBE.
THE REGIONAL GREENHOUSE GAS INITIATIVE. (cover story)
WHERE are the SKY'S LIMITS?
The Stern Review: Implications for Climate Change.
Fahrenheit 3,600.
looking into the fire.
computing.
technology focus.
computing.
technology focus.
filling the void.
into the fold.
Where Does Stand?
the rebirth of cool.
computing.
technology focus.
Greenhorns, Green Choices.
continual career change.
Solid X-ray.
Tracing the Second Law.
Right on Track.
CONTAINING RISK.
DREAM MACHINE.
Online and In Synch.
plastic arts.
computing.
computing.
computing.
technology focus.
Remodeling the Gulf.
Tying Two Forces.
Straight and True.
computing.
technology focus.
Re-engineering Healthcare. (cover story)
give it TIME.
EXTRA CREDIT.
50 Years of Nuclear Power.
Harnessing the Job.
The 2006-2007 ASME Fellows….
The Creative Impulse.
A BOOK PROPOSAL OF UNIVERSAL PROPORTION.
THE REAL STARS OF HARRY POTTER.
OUR WHIRLING WORLD.
OUT OF THE PAST: ASTRONOMY BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG, THEN AND NOW.
sky events.
PLANET HUNTING, "TRANSIT STYLE".
LEARNING AND COMMUNICATING ACROSS DISCIPLINES.
sky events.
NOW, VOYAGER.
THE TOUCH OF ASTRONOMY.
ASTRONOMY EDUCATION REVIEW -- ASTRONOMY EDUCATION JOINS THE MAINSTREAM.
HOT SCIENCE IN THE CLASSROOM.
sky events.
society scope.
Go for the Gold (Star) with Family ASTRO!
THE DEEP PLUNGE SUNWARD.
SEARCHING FOR EARTH'S HISTORY AMONG EARTH LIKE WORLDS.
THE FUTURE FOR THE AMERICAN ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY.
sky events.
The Sauropod Chronicles.
Vulcan's Masonry.
Hiber Nation.
AT A LOSS FOR WORDS.
BABOON HEAVEN.
Space, Time, and Timbuktu.
On the Trail of the Ancestors.
A Spring in Its Step.
WHEN THE SEAS COME MARCHING IN.
WATER AT WAR.
SHARING THE RIVER OUT OF EDEN.
BLUE PLANET BLUES.
A SPECIAL BREW.
SOLD DOWN THE RIVER.
DANGEROUS WATERS.
Altruism among Amoebas.
Photography of Motorcycle Racing.
FINE PRINT BORDER BASICS.
Tucson: International Conference of Photography September 2-9, 2007.
Board of Directors as Photographers.
Exhibitions.
DUBROVNIK Phoenix of War.
Maximize Your Sports Photography.
Audit Report.
OPPORTUNITIES For Individual Members.
Long Exposures Moving Water in Bright Light.
2007 National Officer Slate.
Easy Digital Litho and Line.
Portfolio from a Single Seashell.
Rendezvous with Kamchatka.
Who's Who IN PHOTOGRAPHY 2006.
2007 Honors & Awards Progress Medal Awards.
Michigan's Upper Peninsula: A Paradise for Nature Photographers.
Exhibitions.
Drury's Digital Diary.
2007 PSA Youth Showcase.
Cape Cod's Beautiful Light.
Work Measurements: Interdisciplinary Overlap in Manufacturing and Algebra I.
Designer Babies: Eugenics Repackaged or Consumer Options? (cover story)
The Jet Travel Challenge.
Designing and Building a Cardboard Chair: Children's Engineering at the TECA Eastern Regional Conference.
Sustainable Design: The Next Industrial Revolution?
The ITEA-NASA STS-118 Design Challenges.
Teaching Technology--It Couldn't Get Any Better!
Model Program: Technological Education in Ontario Schools.
The Leaking-Toilet Challenge.
Temporary Housing for the Homeless: A Pre-engineering Design Project. (cover story)
Problem? No Problem! Solving Technical Contradictions.
Robotic Surgery.
Putting Student Enthusiasm to Work.
The Abracadabra of Engineering: Strong Structures from Flimsy Materials.
Solving the Money Problem In a Television Production Class.
Should There Be a National Curriculum for Technological Literacy?
Checking Safety in Technology Education.
Reusable Energy and Power Sources: Rechargeable Batteries.
The Finest in Professional Development: Engineering by Design (EbD) Curriculum Specialists--Helping Hands for Improving Student Achievement!
2007 Leaders to Watch.
Making Sound Connections.
The Old Factory.
Scientific and Technical Visualization in Technology Education.
Politics of Change: A New York Minute.
Technology Education in Legislative Arena: Some Lessons Learned.
The Journey Towards Technological Literacy for All in the United States--Are We There Yet?
Getting to the Center of a Tootsie Roll Pop.
Teaching Technology in Low Socioeconomic Areas.
Engineering Education: Web-Based Interactive Learning Resources.
Educational Horsepower: Engine Design and Construction in the Classroom.
Exploring TeleRobotics: A Radio-Controlled Robot.
Model Program: The British Schools of America.
Barbara Morgan Takes Teaching Into Space.
Statistics: It's in the Numbers! (cover story)
The Status of Technology Education in the United States.
Ms. D. and Harry and the "Single Sheet of Paper" Challenge.
A Model Technology Educator: Thomas A. Edison.
Model Program: Brillion High School, Brillion, WI.
STUDENT CHARACTERISTICS AND EXPECTATIONS OF UNIVERSITY CLASSES: A FREE ELICITATION APPROACH.
COLLEGE STUDENTS' DIETARY PRACTICES AFFECT LUTEIN/ZEAXANTHIN INTAKE: A TWO-GENERATION, ETHNIC AND GENDER STUDY.
HISTORICAL ANALYSIS OF COLLEGE CAMPUS INTERRACIAL DATING.
THE ROLE OF SPIRITUALITY AMONG AFRICAN-AMERICAN COLLEGE MALES ATTENDING A HISTORICALLY BLACK UNIVERSITY.
EFFECTS OF TERROR ATTACKS ON STUDENTS' ANXIETY LEVELS AND WORKPLACE PERCEPTIONS - FIVE YEARS LATER.
PERCEPTIONS OF COLLEGE BUSINESS STUDENTS: GENDER AND ALCOHOLIC MANAGERS.
GLOBAL COMPETENCIES IN STUDENT AFFAIRS/SERVICES PROFESSIONALS: A LITERATURE SYNTHESIS.
DO INTERVENTION PROGRAMS ASSIST STUDENTS TO SUCCEED IN COLLEGE?: A MULTILEVEL LONGITUDINAL STUDY.
EMPOWERMENT OF FEMALE STUDENTS FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE REPRESENTATIVE COUNCILS IN JORDANIAN UNIVERSITIES.
EFFECTS OF LISTENING TO HEAVY METAL MUSIC ON COLLEGE WOMEN: A PILOT STUDY.
A HEALTH PROBE IN COLLEGE STUDENTS LIVING IN LOS ANGELES AND IN TAIWAN: DIETARY PATTERN, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND ENERGY BALANCE.
USING COMPUTER TO SOLVE MATHEMATICS BY JUNIOR SECONDARY SCHOOL STUDENTS IN EDO STATE NIGERIA.
A QUALITATIVE STUDY OF HONOR STUDENTS' LEARNING ORIENTATIONS: THE RARE LIBERAL SCHOLAR.
WHAT MESSAGE SHOULD HEALTH EDUCATORS GIVE REGARDING ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS?
THE EFFECT OF SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTION ON TIMELY GRADUATION.
FACTORIAL STRUCTURE OF BRIEF COPE FOR INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS ATTENDING U.S. COLLEGES.
COLLEGE STUDENT RETENTION: INSTRUMENT VALIDATION AND VALUE FOR PARTNERING BETWEEN ACADEMIC AND COUNSELING SERVICES.
CRISP SETS AND BOOLEAN ALGEBRA: A RESEARCH STRATEGY FOR STUDENT AFFAIRS.
SOCIAL INEQUALITY ON THE COLLEGE CAMPUS: A CONSIDERATION OF HOMOSEXUALITY.
STUDY ABROAD IN WEST AFRICA: AN INTERDISCIPLINARY PROGRAM OF INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION.
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY PATTERNS OF YOUNG WOMEN POST-COLLEGE GRADUATION.
SUMMER LEARNING CAMPS: HELPING STUDENTS TO PREPARE FOR COLLEGE.
INTEGRATING CRITICAL THINKING AND MEMORANDUM WRITING INTO COURSE CURRICULUM USING THE INTERNET AS A RESEARCH TOOL.
AN EXPLANATORY MODEL OF STUDENT-ATHLETE DRINKING: THE ROLE OF TEAM LEADERSHIP, SOCIAL NORMS, PERCEPTIONS OF RISK, AND COACHES' ATTITUDES TOWARD ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION.
MEASURING ATTITUDES TOWARDS SORORITY AND FRATERNITY MEMBERS: INDICATION OF IMPLICIT, INGROUP FAVORITISM.
LACK OF STEREOTYPE THREAT AT A LIBERAL ARTS COLLEGE.
EMPIRICAL AND PERCEIVED UTILITY OF TEXT BOXES.
THE AMERICAN HIGH SCHOOL.
UNDERSTANDING UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH EXPERIENCES FROM THE STUDENT PERSPECTIVE: A PHENOMENOLOGICAL STUDY OF A SUMMER STUDENT RESEARCH PROGRAM.
A QUESTION OF DEGREES FOR ACADEMIC LIBRARIANS.
INVESTIGATING THE ROLE OF LIFE STATUS CHANGES AND NEGATIVE EMOTIONS IN COMPENSATORY CONSUMPTION AMONG COLLEGE STUDENTS.
AN EXPLORATORY STUDY OF UNDERGRADUATE COLLEGE STUDENTS' PERCEPTIONS AND ATTITUDES TOWARD FOREIGN ACCENTED FACULTY.
TARGETING, SEGMENTING AND POSITIONING THE MARKET FOR COLLEGE STUDENTS TO INCREASE CUSTOMER SATISFACTION AND OVERALL PERFORMANCE.
THE IMPACT OF A PROGRAM FOR THE DISADVANTAGED ON STUDENT RETENTION.
The Effects of Social and Cultural Capital on Student Persistence: Are Community Colleges More Meritocratic?
Community College Faculty: What We Know and Need to Know.
The Institutional Vision of Community Colleges.
Chief Academic Officers' Demographics and Educational Backgrounds.
Predictors of First-Year Student Retention in the Community College.
Factors Predicting Community College Faculty Satisfaction with Instructional Autonomy.
Does the Elimination of Prerequisites Affect Enrollment and Success?
Adjunct Faculty in Community Colleges: An Academic Administrator's Guide to Recruiting, Supporting, and Retaining Great Teachers.
Security, Dignity, Caring Relationships, and Meaningful Work.
Remediation in the Community College.
Predicting Performance in a Community College-Area Course from Academic Skill Level.
Editor's Choice: Essay Remembering Raymond J. Young and the Grass-Roots Development of Community Colleges From 1950 to 1976.
Making the Case for a Positive Approach to Improving Organizational Performance in Higher Education Institutions.
The Availability, Prospects, and Fiscal Potential of On-Campus Housing at Rural Community Colleges.
Preparation for Midskilled Work and Continuous Learning in Nine Community College Occupational Programs.
Performing Gender in the Workplace.
MUNSTERS TO MARGARITAVILLE: A CRITICAL LOOK AT CELEBRITY AUTHORS.
PHYSICAL EDUCATION PRESERVICE TEACHERS' CONCEPTIONS OF CARING.
FACTORS CHANGING ATTITUDES OF GRADUATE SCHOOL STUDENTS TOWARD AN INTRODUCTORY RESEARCH METHODOLOGY COURSE.
GENDER SENSITIVE TEACHING: A REFLECTIVE APPROACH FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION TEACHER TRAINING PROGRAMS.
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF DIRECT INSTRUCTION IN TEACHING ENGLISH IN ELEMENTARY PUBLIC EDUCATION SCHOOLS IN KUWAIT: A RESEARCH CASE STUDY.
A WEB-BASED TEACHING AID FOR PRESENTING THE CONCEPTS OF NORM REFERENCED AND CRITERION REFERENCED TESTING.
CLASSROOM TEACHER'S PERFORMANCE-BASE EVALUATION FORM (CTPBEF) FOR PUBLIC EDUCATION SCHOOLS IN THE STATE OF KUWAIT: A FRAMEWORK.
PARTNERING WITH LIBRARIANS TO MEET NCATE STANDARDS IN TEACHER EDUCATION.
EMPOWERING PRESERVICE TEACHERS THROUGH TUTORING CHRONICALLY ILL CANCER PATIENTS.
CASE STUDY INSTRUCTION IN TEACHER EDUCATION: OPPORTUNITY TO DEVELOP STUDENTS' CRITICAL THINKING, SCHOOL SMARTS AND DECISION MAKING.
FACTORS PREVENTING WOMEN'S ADVANCEMENT IN MANAGEMENT IN TURKEY.
WHAT IS MEANT BY "ACTIVE LEARNING?"
TEACHER CANDIDATES AND MASTER MATH TEACHERS PERSONAL CONCEPTS ABOUT TEACHING MATHEMATICS.
ENTHUSIASTIC AND GROWING TEACHERS: INDIVIDUAL DISPOSITIONS, CRITICAL INCIDENCES, AND FAMILY SUPPORTS.
FIELD-BASED TEACHER PREPARATION: AN ORGANIZATIONAL ANALYSIS OF ENABLING CONDITIONS.
JEDI: A NEW PATHWAY TO SUCCESS FOR OUR FORGOTTEN YOUTH.
LESSONS LEARNED CONCERNING A STUDENT CENTERED TEACHING STYLE BY UNIVERSITY MATHEMATICS PROFESSORS FROM SECONDARY SCHOOL EDUCATORS.
LETS ELIMINATE THE EIGHTH GRADE!
USING GUIDED PLAY TO ENHANCE CHILDREN'S CONVERSATION, CREATIVITY AND COMPETENCE IN LITERACY.
A DREAM DEFERRED: THE EXPERIENCE OF AN AFRICAN AMERICAN STUDENT IN A DOCTORAL PROGRAM IN SCIENCE.
FACULTY PERCEPTIONS OF SHARED DECISION MAKING AND THE PRINCIPAL'S LEADERSHIP BEHAVIORS IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN A LARGE URBAN DISTRICT.
COMING TO OUR SENSES: INCORPORATING BRAIN RESEARCH FINDINGS INTO CLASSROOM INSTRUCTION.
ON THE ROLE OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATORS AND LIBRARIANS IN CONSTRUCTIVE PEDAGOGY.
PERCEIVED STRESS BY STUDENTS IN A PHARMACY CURRICULUM.
OVERCOMING THE BARRIERS TO LEARNING FACED BY HYPERACTIVE STUDENTS IN THE DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH BENSON IDAHOSA UNIVERSITY, BENIN CITY.
ADVISOR-ADVISEE THREE: GRADUATE STUDENTS' PERCEPTIONS OF VERBAL AGGRESSION, CREDIBILITY, AND CONFLICT STYLES IN THE ADVISING RELATIONSHIP.
AN EXPLORATORY STUDY OF THE APPLICATION OF EARLY CHILDHOOD ENVIRONMENT RATING SCALE CRITERIA.
ASSESSMENT TECHNIQUES OF INSTRUCTORS IN TWO COMMUNITY COLLEGES IN A STATE-WIDE SYSTEM.
IMPACT OF ONLINE DISCUSSION ON ELEMENTARY TEACHER CANDIDATES' ANXIETY TOWARDS TEACHING MATHEMATICS.
A PARTNERSHIP IN PROGRESS.
DOES THE TYPE OF CAMPUS INFLUENCE SELF-REGULATED LEARNING AS MEASURED BY THE MOTIVATED STRATEGIES FOR LEARNING QUESTIONNAIRE (MSLQ)?
NO VACATION FROM BULLYING: A SUMMER CAMP INTERVENTION PILOT STUDY.
NEW HORIZONS AND CHALLENGES IN CHINA'S PUBLIC SCHOOLS FOR PARENT INVOLVEMENT.
WORKING THE COLLEGE SYSTEM: SIX STRATEGIES FOR BUILDING A PERSONAL POWERBASE.
LEADERSHIP IN THE SCHOOL SETTING.
PERCEPTIONS AND ATTITUDES OF SCHOOL PRINCIPALS TOWARDS SCHOOL TRACKING: STRUCTURAL CONSIDERATIONS OF PERSONAL BELIEFS.
SELECTIVE ATTENTIONAL EFFECTS OF ADJUNCT STUDY QUESTIONS ON ACHIEVEMENT IN NIGERIAN SECONDARY SCHOOL SCIENCE.
ENRICHMENT CURRICULUM: ESSENTIAL FOR MATHEMATICALLY GIFTED STUDENTS.
TEACHER REFLECTION AS TEACHER CHANGE, AND TEACHER CHANGE AS MORAL RESPONSE.
MOVING BEYOND LECTURE: COOPERATIVE LEARNING AND THE SECONDARY SOCIAL STUDIES CLASSROOM.
DEVELOPING INTERPERSONAL AND GROUP DYNAMICS THROUGH ASYNCHRONOUS THREADED DISCUSSIONS: THE USE OF DISCUSSION BOARD IN COLLABORATIVE LEARNING.
THE IDEAL PROFESSOR: STUDENT PERCEPTIONS OF EFFECTIVE INSTRUCTOR PRACTICES, ATTITUDES, AND SKILLS.
ARE WE HOLDING BACK OUR STUDENTS THAT POSSESS THE POTENTIAL TO EXCEL?
INTEGRATION OF CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS INTO ELEMENTARY SCHOOL TEACHER EDUCATION COURSES IN MATHEMATICS.
ALABAMA ELEMENTARY PRINCIPALS PERCEPTIONS OF BULLYING.
CARING FOR FOSTER CHILDREN IN THE SOUTH. WHY THEY DID NOT HAVE EVEN ONE PERSON TO CARE FOR THEM.
CONDUCTING A RURAL SCHOOL DISTRICT TRANSITION FAIR: SUCCESSES AND CHALLENGES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES.
FACTORS AFFECTING THE DEVELOPMENT OF ANALOGICAL REASONING IN YOUNG CHILDREN: A REVIEW OF LITERATURE.
Physical Settings and Materials Recommended for Play Therapy with Japanese Children.
Teachers' Quality, Instructional Strategies and Students' Performance in Secondary School Science.
Teachers' Opinions about Building a Democratic Classroom.
Democratic Teacher Beliefs According to the Teacher's Gender and Locus of Control.
The Role of Instructors and Peers in Establishing Classroom Community.
Different, Not Better: Gender Differences in Mathematics Learning and Achievement.
And The Beat Goes On….
Theoretical Soundness, Proven Effectiveness, and Implementation Fidelity of the HOSTS Language Arts Program Among Children Identified as At-Risk in Urban Elementary Schools.
Mental Health and the Curriculum.
Favoritism in the Classroom: A Study on Turkish Schools.
Video-Based Test Questions: A Novel Means of Evaluation.
A Review of the Extent, Nature, Characteristics and Effects of Bullying Behaviour in Schools.
The Effects of the Multiple Intelligence Teaching Strategy on the Academic Achievement of Eighth Grade Math Students.
Student Perceptions of Teaching Evaluations.
Student-instructor Communication: An Innovative Teaching Material in Support of Student Learning.
An Empirical Comparison of Traditional and Web-enhanced Classrooms.
Reliability for the Greek Version of the "Test of Everyday Reasoning (TER).".
An Empirical Investigation of Student Achievement and Satisfaction in Different Learning Environments.
Opinions of Prospective Social Studies Teachers on the Use of Information Technologies in Teaching Geographical Subjects.
Extent of Parental Involvement in Improving the Students' Levels in Special Education Programs in Kuwait.
Relationships Between the Perceived Value of Instructional Techniques and Academic Motivation.
An Assessment of Stress Experienced by Students in a Prepharmacy Curriculum.
Women's Education in Science Technology and Mathematics (STM) Challenges for National Development.
The Workaholism Syndrome: An Emerging Issue in the Psychological Literature.
Techniques for Encouraging Peer Collaboration: Online Threaded Discussion or Fishbowl Interaction.
The Use of Wireless Technology to Augment Problem-Based Learning in Special Education Preservice Teacher Training.
Assignment Type and Student Performance in College Economics Courses.
A Bronfenbrenner Ecological Perspective on the Transition to Teaching for Alternative Certification.
The World Rests on a Turtle, But on What Does That Turtle Rest? A Reply to Haier and Jung.
Getting to the Heart of the Brain: Using Cognitive Neuroscience to Explore the Nature of Human Ability and Performance.
Student Voices, Global Echoes: Service-Learning and the Gifted.
A Global Village Is a Small World.
Developing Global Awareness and Responsible World Citizenship With Global Learning.
Introduction to the Special Issue on the Cognitive Neuroscience of Giftedness.
Brain Imaging Studies of Intelligence and Creativity: What is the Picture for Education?
Mathematically Gifted Children: Developmental Brain Characteristics and Their Prognosis for Well-Being.
Vision With Action: Developing Sensitivity to Societal Concerns in Gifted Youth.
Engaging the Spiritual Intelligence of Gifted Students to Build Global Awareness in the Classroom.
High Abilities at Fluid Analogizing: A Cognitive Neuroscience Construct of Giftedness.
Lessons From Our Kissing Cousins: Third Culture Kids and Gifted Children.
Utopian Visions: Promise and Pitfalls in the Global Awareness of the Gifted.
New Counselors' Leadership Efforts in School Counseling: Themes from a Year-Long Qualitative Study.
Development and Initial Investigation of the School Counseling Program Evaluation Scale.
The Influence of the War in Iraq on American Youth's Fears: Implications for Professional School Counselors.
Report of the National Panel for Evidence-Based School Counseling: Outcome Research Coding Protocol and Evaluation of Student Success Skills and Second Step.
Perceptions of Bullying and Associated Trauma During Adolescence.
Middle School Counselors' Competence in Conducting Developmental Classroom Lessons: Is Teaching Experience Necessary?
The Multidimensionality of School Engagement and Math Achievement Among Racial Groups.
School Counselors' Attitudes Regarding Statewide Comprehensive Developmental Guidance Model Implementation.
School Shootings and Counselor Leadership: Four Lessons from the Field.
Four Views of the Professional School Counselor-Principal Relationship: A Q-Methodology Study.
Traumatic Symptoms in Sexually Abused Children: Implications for School Counselors.
Skill-Builders: Improving Middle School Students' Self-Beliefs for Learning Mathematics.
Culturally Competent Counseling for Religious and Spiritual African American Adolescents.
School Counselors' Multicultural Self-Efficacy: A Preliminary Investigation.
Managing the Quagmire of Counseling in a School: Bringing the Parents Onboard.
The School-Wide Cultural Competence Observation Checklist for School Counselors: An Exploratory Factor Analysis.
School Counselors Walking the Walk and Talking the Talk: A Grounded Theory of Effective Program Implementation.
Precursors to the Gender Gap in College Enrollment: Children's Aspirations and Expectations for Their Futures.
An Evaluation of Suicide Gatekeeper Training for School Counselors and Teachers.
Student Risk-Taking Behaviors: When Do School Counselors Break Confidentiality?
Exploring Themes of Resiliency in Children After the Death of a Parent.
Evaluating Curriculum-Based Measurement Slope Estimates Using Data From Triannual Universal Screenings.
The Dual-Factor Model of Mental Health in Youth.
Sticks and Stones Can Break My Bones and Words Can Really Hurt Me.
From Research to Practice: Promoting Academic Competence for Underserved Students.
Addressing Research Gaps in the Intersection Between Homophobia and Bullying.
Ethnicity and English Proficiency: Teacher Perceptions of Academic and Interpersonal Competence in European American and Latino Students.
Looking Beyond Psychopathology: The Dual-Factor Model of Mental Health in Youth.
Contextual and Moderating Effects of the Peer Group Climate on Use of Homophobic Epithets.
You're So Gay!: Do Different Forms of Bullying Matter for Adolescent Males?
Teacher-Child Relationships and Pedagogical Practices: Considering the Teacher's Perspective.
Reading Fluency as a Predictor of Reading Proficiency in Low-Performing, High-Poverty Schools.
Maintaining the Hegemonic Masculinity Through Selective Attachment, Homophobia, and Gay-Baiting in Schools: Challenges to Intervention.
School Violence: Associations With Control, Security/Enforcement, Educational/Therapeutic Approaches, and Demographic Factors.
The Generalizability of Externalizing Behavior Composites and Subscale Scores Across Time, Rater, and Instrument.
Predictive Accuracy of Nonsense Word Fluency for English Language Learners.
Homophobic Teasing, Psychological Outcomes, and Sexual Orientation Among High School Students: What Influence Do Parents and Schools Have?
Well-Being Among Same-Sex- and Opposite-Sex-Attracted Youth at School.
Parent Involvement in Preschool: Predictors and the Relation of Involvement to Preliteracy Development.
Determining an Effective Intervention Within a Brief Experimental Analysis for Reading: A Meta-Analytic Review.
INTERNALIZATION OF VALUES AND SELF-ESTEEM AMONG BRAZILIAN TEENAGERS FROM AUTHORITATIVE, INDULGENT, AUTHORITARIAN, AND NEGLECTFUL HOMES.
THE EFFECT OF A SELF-MONITORED RELAXATION BREATHING EXERCISE ON MALE ADOLESCENT AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR.
SINGLE MOTHERS OF EARLY ADOLESCENTS: PERCEPTIONS OF COMPETENCE.
PARENTING AND ADOLESCENT WELL-BEING IN TWO EUROPEAN COUNTRIES.
PARENTAL BOND AND LIFE COURSE TRANSITIONS FROM ADOLESCENCE TO YOUNG ADULTHOOD.
SEXUAL ATTITUDES AND BEHAVIOR AT FOUR UNIVERSITIES: DO REGION, RACE, AND/OR RELIGION MATTER?
PREDICTION OF WORK EFFICIENCY IN EARLY ADOLESCENCE UNDER THE EFFECTS OF NOISE.
POSTFORMAL THINKING AND CREATIVITY AMONG LATE ADOLESCENTS: A POST-PIAGETIAN APPROACH.
MULTIPLE VICTIMIZATION OF SPANISH ADOLESCENTS: A MULTILEVEL ANALYSIS.
ACCEPTABILITY OF DATING VIOLENCE AMONG LATE ADOLESCENTS: THE ROLE OF SPORTS PARTICIPATION, COMPETITIVE ATTITUDES, AND SELECTED DYNAMICS OF RELATIONSHIP VIOLENCE.
THE CARE-SYSTEM FOR HOMELESS YOUTH IN THE NETHERLANDS: PERCEPTIONS OF YOUNGSTERS THROUGH A PEER RESEARCH APPROACH.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN LEISURE SATISFACTION AND LIFE SATISFACTION OF ADOLESCENTS CONCERNING ONLINE GAMES.
THE PROBLEM OF SCHOOL BULLIES: WHAT THE RESEARCH TELLS US.
SOCIALIZATION AGENTS AND ACTIVITIES OF YOUNG ADOLESCENTS.
A REVIEW OF ONLINE SOCIAL NETWORKING PROFILES BY ADOLESCENTS: IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH AND INTERVENTION.
MALE AND FEMALE DEVELOPMENT OF DELINQUENCY DURING ADOLESCENCE AND EARLY ADULTHOOD : A DIFFERENTIAL AUTOREGRESSIVE MODEL OF DELINQUENCY USING AN OVERLAPPING COHORT DESIGN.
SOCIAL REPRESENTATIONS USED BY THE PARENTS OF MEXICAN ADOLESCENT DRUG USERS UNDER TREATMENT TO EXPLAIN THEIR CHILDREN'S DRUG USE: GENDER DIFFERENCES IN PARENTAL NARRATIVES.
HISPANIC VERSUS AFRICAN AMERICAN GIRLS: BODY IMAGE, NUTRITION, AND PUBERTY.
LINKING ACADEMIC SOCIAL ENVIRONMENTS, EGO-IDENTITY FORMATION, EGO VIRTUES, AND ACADEMIC SUCCESS.
PARENTING STYLES AND LEARNED RESOURCEFULNESS OF TURKISH ADOLESCENTS.
COLLEGE STUDENTS' ROLE MODELS, LEARNING STYLE PREFERENCES, AND ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT IN COLLABORATIVE TEACHING: ABSOLUTE VERSUS RELATTVISTIC THINKING.
PREDICTORS OF PERCEIVED SATISFACTION WITH PARENTAL CONTROL IN CHINESE ADOLESCENTS: A 3-YEAR LONGITUDINAL STUDY.
ADOLESCENT INTERNET USAGE IN TAIWAN: EXPLORING GENDER DIFFERENCES.
IDENTITY FORMATION OF UNITED STATES AMERICAN AND ASIAN INDIAN ADOLESCENTS.
The "Lettered City" and the Insurrection of Subjugated Knowledges in Latin America.
Meaning-Making in Social Movements.
What Makes a Place Ethnic? The Formal and Symbolic Spatial Manifestations of Teenek Identity (Mexico).
The Trap of Abstract Space: Recomposing Russian-Speaking Immigrants in Post-Soviet Estonia.
The Humanity Game: Art, Islam, and the War on Terror.
Grounded Utopian Movements: Subjects of Neglect.
Feeding Nayaka Children and English Readers: A Bifocal Ethnography of Parental Feeding in "The Giving Environment.".
If They Touch One of Us, They Touch All of Us: Cooperativism as a Counterlogic to Neoliberal Capitalism.
From Silence to Silence: The Hidden Story of a Beef Stew in Cape Verde.
Paper Tigers on the Prowl: Rumors, Violence and Agency in the Up-Country of Sri Lanka.
Female Drug Smugglers on the U.S.-Mexico Border: Gender, Crime, and Empowerment.
Setting Themselves Apart: Education, Capabilities, and Sexuality Among Samburu Women in Kenya.
Blurring Boundaries: Recognizing Knowledge-Practices in the Study of Social Movements.
Taming Islam: Studying Religion in Secular Turkey.
Producing Cosmopolitanism at the Borderlands: Lonely Planeteers and "Local" Cosmopolitans in Southwest China.
We Are All Going to Die: Kinship, Belonging, and the Morality of HIV/AIDS-Related Illnesses and Deaths in Rural Tanzania.
Research Note: Issues of Production vs. Reproduction/Maintenance Revisited: Towards an Understanding of Arizona's Immigration Policies.
Social Movements and Collective Identity: A Decentered, Dialogic View.
Surveying a Sacred Landscape.
Search for the Mycenaeans.
Who Were the Hurrians? (cover story)
Turning Japanese.
City of the Dead.
Windows on the Past.
Realm of the Cloud People.
Guardians of Antiquity?
The Shah's Great Wall.
Ancient Excrement.
The Henge Builders. (cover story)
Native Sweden.
Amazonian Harvest.
Afghanistan's Secret Treasure.
The Starter Castle.
What's the Point?
Rock Music.
No Stone Unturned.
The World's First Temple.
The Gladiator Diet.
City Beneath the Mounds.
A Visual Journey Through Egypt's Frontier.
Witches of Cornwall.
Fighting with Jaguars, Bleeding for Rain.
Hawaiians of Skull Valley.
NONMEDICAL PRESCRIPTION DRUG USE AMONG HISPANICS.
PERCEIVING THE RISK OF SUBSTANCE USE: THE ROLES OF NATIVITY, ACCULTURATION, AND FAMILY SUPPORT AMONG HISPANIC CHILDREN.
THE EFFECT OF ACCULTURATION ON PATTERNS OF HISPANIC SUBSTANCE USE IN WASHINGTON STATE.
COMMUNICATION ABOUT SEXUALLY-RELATED TOPICS AMONG HISPANIC SUBSTANCE-ABUSING ADOLESCENTS AND THEIR PARENTS.
EXPLAINING SUBSTANCE USE AMONG PUERTO RICAN ADOLESCENTS: A PARTIAL TEST OF SOCIAL LEARNING THEORY.
A CROSS-NATIONAL COMPARISON OF ADOLESCENT ALCOHOL AND DRUG USE BEHAVIORS: U. S. HISPANICS AND YOUTH IN THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.
HEPATITIS B VIRUS PREVALENCE AND VACCINATION RATES AMONG HISPANIC INJECTION DRUG USERS PARTICIPATING IN A VACCINATION CAMPAIGN.
TRAJECTORIES OF ACCULTURATION AND ENCULTURATION IN RELATION TO HEAVY EPISODIC DRINKING AND MARIJUANA USE IN A SAMPLE OF MEXICAN AMERICAN SERIOUS JUVENILE OFFENDERS.
HISPANICS IN SPECIALTY TREATMENT FOR SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS.
STIGMATIZATION, SUBSTANCE USE, AND SEXUAL RISK BEHAVIOR AMONG LATINO GAY AND BISEXUAL MEN AND TRANSGENDER PERSONS.
MEXICAN-AMERICAN YOUTH DRUG USE AND ACCULTURATION: A NOTE ON THE MITIGATING EFFECTS OF CONTEXTUAL DYNAMICS.
DRUG USE/ABUSE PREVALENCE, ETIOLOGY, PREVENTION, AND TREATMENT IN HISPANIC ADOLESCENTS: A CULTURAL PERSPECTIVE.
ETHICAL ISSUES IN RESEARCH WITH HISPANIC DRUG USERS: PARTICIPANT PERSPECTIVES ON RISKS AND BENEFITS.
SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS, SOCIAL ASSIMILATION, AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS AMONG ADULT LATINOS IN THE U.S.
ACCULTURATION AMONG LATINO YOUTH AND THE RISK FOR SUBSTANCE USE: ISSUES OF DEFINITION AND MEASUREMENT.
INTRODUCTION TO THE SPECIAL ISSUE.
HOW PREDICTORS OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG ABUSE VARY BY AGE.
NONMEDICAL USE OF PRESCRIPTION STIMULANTS AND ANALGESICS: ASSOCIATIONS WITH SOCIAL AND ACADEMIC BEHAVIORS AMONG COLLEGE STUDENTS.
PERSISTENCE IN TURNING TO FAITH AS A PREDICTOR OF DRUG USE AND CRIMINALITY AMONG DRUG COURT CLIENTS.
RELIGION AND ALCOHOL USE AMONG COLLEGE STUDENTS: EXPLORING THE ROLE OF DOMAIN-SPECIFIC RELIGIOUS SALIENCE.
REGULATORY ISSUES ENCOUNTERED WHEN CONDUCTING LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE ABUSE RESEARCH.
THE PLACE OF ADOPTION IN THE NIDA CLINICAL TRIALS NETWORK.
RELIGION AND POLITICS: NEW RELIGIOUS SITES AND SPATIAL TRANSGRESSION IN ISRAEL.
MOZAMBIQUE, NEOLIBERAL LAND REFORM, AND THE LIMPOPO NATIONAL PARK.
WEST AFRICAN ENVIRONMENTAL NARRATIVES AND DEVELOPMENT--VOLUNTEER PRAXIS.
GERMAN GREAT--POWER RELATIONS IN THE PAGES OF SIMPLICISSIMUS, 1896-1914.
SEPARATE BUT EQUAL? DESEGREGATING BALTIMORE'S GOLF COURSES.
FIGHTING FIRE WITH A BROKEN TEACUP: A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF SOUTH AFRICA'S LAND-REDISTRIBUTION PROGRAM.
ETHNIC NEIGHBORHOODS AND URBAN REVITALIZATION: CAN EUROPE USE THE AMERICAN MODEL?
EXPANSION OF GOLF COURSES IN THE UNITED STATES.
LAND REFORM IN THE ERA OF NEOLIBERALISM: CASE STUDIES FROM THE GLOBAL SOUTH.
GENEALOGIES OF THE GRID: REVISITING STANISLAWSKI'S SEARCH FOR THE ORIGIN OF THE GRID--PATTERN TOWN.
THE RISE, FALL, AND RECONFIGURATION OF THE MEXICAN EJIDO.
HOBBY RANCHING AND CHILE'S LAND-REFORM LEGACY.
RESURGENT MEXICAN PHOENIX.
A MAP OF THE WORLD.
THOMAS JEFFERSON, AMERICAN GEOGRAPHERS, AND THE USES OF GEOGRAPHY.
ASIANS, PACIFIC ISLANDERS, AND ETHNOBURBS IN AUCKLAND, NEW ZEALAND.
A DIGITAL GEOGRAPHY OF INDIGENOUS MEXICO: PROTOTYPE FOR THE AMERICAN GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY'S BOWMAN EXPEDITIONS.
PLACE AS A SOURCE OF IDENTITY IN COLONIZING SOCIETIES: ISRAELI SETTLEMENTS IN GAZA.
CONCRETE-BLOCK FARMERS IN MEXICO.
GEOGRAPHY AND LAND REFORM.
THE MARBLE BEACHES OF TUSCANY.
Nurse Social Work Practitioner: A New Professional for Health Care Settings.
Health Care Reform in the 2008 Presidential Primaries.
Self-Control, Self-Efficacy, Role Overload, and Stress Responses among Siblings of Children with Cancer.
I Cant Stop Pulling My Hair! Using Numbing Cream as an Adjunct Treatment for Trichotillomania.
A Retest of Two HIV Disclosure Theories: The Women's Story.
Risk and Protective Influences in the Lives of Siblings of Youths with Spina Bifida.
Developing a Culturally Responsive Breast Cancer Screening Promotion with Native Hawaiian Women in Churches.
From the Real Frontline: The Unique Contributions of Mental Health Caregivers in Canadian Foster Homes.
Perceptions of Biopsychosocial Services Needs among Older Adults with Severe Mental Illness: Met and Unmet Needs.
Hospital Social Workers and Indirect Trauma Exposure: An Exploratory Study of Contributing Factors.
Discharge Planning in Acute Care Hospitals in Israel: Services Planned and Levels of Implementation and Adequacy.
Cultural Competence in a Group Intervention Designed for Latino Patients Living with HIV/AIDS.
Mothers' Marital Adaptation Following the Birth of Twins or Singletons: Empirical Evidence and Practical Insights.
Patient-Staff Interactions and Mental Health in Chronic Dialysis Patients.
Mothers Raising Children with Sickle Cell Disease at the Intersection of Race, Gender, and Illness Stigma.
Determinants of Quality of Life in Primary Care Patients with Diabetes: Implications for Social Workers.
The Experience of Living Kidney Donors.
Caribbean Immigrants in the United States--Health and Health Care: The Need for a Social Agenda.
The Human Genome Project: Implications for Families.
Intimate Partner Violence among Midlife and Older Women: A Descriptive Analysis of Women Seeking Medical Services.
Relationship between Religious Involvement and Psychological Well-Being: A Social Justice Perspective.
Domestic Violence Shelters as Prevention Agents for HIV/AIDS?
Fear of Falling and Activity Avoidance in a National Sample of Older Adults in the United States.
Prisoner Reentry.
The Diverse Faces of Latinos in the Midwest: Planning for Service Delivery and Building Community.
Forty-four Techniques for Empowering Older Adults Living with Diabetes.
Social Work Research on African Americans and Suicidal Behavior: A Systematic 25-Year Review.
The Impact of Kin and Fictive Kin Relationships on the Mental Health of Black Adult Children of Alcoholics.
Barriers to Hospice Use among African Americans: A Systematic Review.
The Functions of Social Support in the Mental Health of Male and Female Migrant Workers in China.
Self-Perceived Risk of HIV among Women with Protective Orders against Male Partners .
Parents of Preterm Infants Two Months after Discharge from the Hospital: Are They Still at (Parental) Risk?
Intimate Partner Violence: A Call for Social Work Action.
Modifying Flag Football for Gender Equitable Engagement in Secondary Schools.
Antecedents for Interrole Conflict in the High School Teacher/Coach.
Effectiveness of Point-Based Physical Activity Intervention.
Inspiring Critical Reflection in Preservice Teachers.
An Examination of Kinesiology GTAs' Perceptions of an Instructional Development and Evaluation Model.
Utilizing Qualitative Feedback to Investigate Student Perceptions of a Basic Instruction Program.
Physical Educators' Technology Competencies and Usage.
Teacher Perceptions of Physical Education in the Primary School: Attitudes, Values and Curriculum Preferences.
Acting on Our Values: Do Social Workers Volunteer?
Frances Kellor and the Americanization Movement.
Has Social Work Met Its Commitment to Native Hawaiians and Other Pacific Islanders? A Review of the Periodical Literature.
The Growing Admissibility of Expert Testimony by Clinical Social Workers on Competence to Stand Trial.
Moving toward Culturally Competent Practice with Muslims: Modifying Cognitive Therapy with Islamic Tenets.
Kin Networks and Poverty among African Americans: Past and Present.
Negotiating with Antisocial Clients.
Demographic Trends in Social Work over a Quarter-Century in an Increasingly Female Profession.
Our Nation's Immigrants in Peril: An Urgent Call to Social Workers.
Race, Resistance, and Restructuring: Emerging Skills in the New Social Services.
Strengths-Oriented Family Therapy for Adolescents with Substance Abuse Problems.
Social Workers and the NASW Code of Ethics: Belief, Behavior, Disjuncture.
The Person-in-Environment Approach: Professional Ideology and Practice of Social Workers in Israel.
Race and Hospital Diagnoses of Schizophrenia and Mood Disorders.
Suicidal Ideation and Attempts among Sexual Minority Youths Receiving Social Services.
Sexual Trafficking in the United States: A Domestic Problem with Transnational Dimensions.
Development of a Family Intervention for Native Hawaiian Women with Cancer: A Pilot Study.
Openness in Adoption: What We Know So Far--A Critical Review of the Literature.
Perceived Motivational Climate and Self-Determined Motivation in Female High School Athletes.
Coping Styles Following Acute Stress in Sport Among Elite Chinese Athletes: A Test of Trait and Transactional Coping Theories.
The Relationship Between Organizational Commitment, Perceived Relatedness, and Intentions to Continue in Canadian Track and Field Officials.
Spiritual Well-Being and Its Influence on Athletic Coping Profiles.
Effects of Pre-Competition Positive Imagery and Self-Instructions on Accuracy of Serving in Tennis.
The Development of Momentum in a Basketball Shooting Task.
Negative Self-Talk During Sport Performance: Relationships with Pre-Competition Anxiety and Goal-Performance Discrepancies.
Are We Underestimating the Affective Benefits of Exercise? An Experience Sampling Study of University Aerobics Participants.
Stigma Consciousness as a Predictor of Children's Participation in Recreational vs. Competitive Sports.
Characteristics of an Effective Sport Psychology Consultant: Perspectives from Athletes and Consultants.
Sport Commitment Differences Among Tennis Players on the Basis of Participation Outlet and Skill Level.
Supported or Pressured? An Examination of Agreement Among Parent's and Children on Parent's Role in Youth Sports.
Injured Athletes' Perceptions of the Social Support Provided by Their Coaches and Teammates During Rehabilitation.
Sport Superstition as a Function of Skill Level and Task Difficulty.
Associations among Field Dependence-Independence, Sports Participation, and Physical Activity Level Among School Children.
Defining Success in Strength Training Using Achievement Goal Orientations.
College Students' Motivation Toward Weight Training: A Combined Perspective.
A Survey of the Academic Engagement of Students with Visual Impairments in General Education Classes.
Driving and Low Vision: An Evidence-based Review of Rehabilitation.
The Role of Spirituality in Coping with Visual Impairment.
I Can Fix That! Creating an On-campus Job for a Student.
Teaching Choice Making to Children with Visual Impairments and Multiple Disabilities in Preschool and Kindergarten Classrooms.
Speaker's Corner.
Interpreting the Meaning of the Terms Certified and Highly Qualified for Teachers of Students with Visual Impairments.
Discrimination and Comprehension of Synthetic Speech by Students with Visual Impairments: The Case of Similar Acoustic Patterns.
Program Accountability for Students Who Are Visually Impaired.
The Experiences of Parents of Students with Visual Impairments Who Are Professionals in the Field of Visual Impairment.
The Role and Training of Paraprofessionals Who Work with Students Who Are Visually Impaired.
A Survey on Literacy Instruction for Students with Multiple Disabilities.
The Efficacy of Low Vision Devices for Students in Specialized Schools for Students Who Are Blind in Kathmandu Valley, Nepal.
Advice on Classroom Reading for a Child with Low Vision.
Caregivers with Visual Impairments: A Preliminary Study.
Analyzing the Presence of Academic and Vision-Specific Priorities in Specialized Schools Through Culture: A Case Study.
E-Learning and Blindness: A Comparative Study of the Quality of an E-Learning Experience.
Where No Woman Has Gone Before.
The Text as Fellowship.
Uneasy Terrain: Image, Text, Landscape, and Contemporary Indigenous Artists in the United States.
Indian Play.
Custer's Last Sitcom.
Resisting Exile in the "Land of the Free": Indigenous Groundwork at Colonial Intersections.
Trust and Survival.
Indigenous Owership and Emergence of U.S. Liberal Imperialism.
The "Lie" of the Land.
Resisting Exile in the Homeland: He Mo'olemo No La'ie.
At the Crossroads of Hualapai History, Memory, and American Colonization: Contesting Space and Place.
Ethnography and the Production of Foreignness in Indian Captivity Narratives.
Reclaiming Indigenous Intellectual, Political, and Geographic Space: A Path for Navajo Nationhood.
Will the Real Tomochichi Please Come Forward?
Exploitation of American Indian Symbols: A First Amendment Analysis.
THE PORTRAYAL OF THE EAST VS. THE WEST IN LADY MARY MONTAGU'S LETTERS AND EMILY RUETE'S MEMOIRS.
THE NATURE OF THE UNCANNY IN SEASON OF MIGRATION TO THE NORTH.
CURRICULAR ACTIVISM AND ACADEMIC FREEDOM: REPRESENTATIONS OF ARABS AND MUSLIMS IN PRINT AND INTERNET MEDIA.
America the Resilient.
The Rise of China and the Future of the West. (cover story)
Rush to the Exit.
An Empty Revolution.
Transforming Nations.
Separatism's Final Country.
Arctic Meltdown.
China's Olympic Nightmare.
The Next President. (cover story)
Better Institutions, Not Partition.
How to Leave a Stable Iraq.
Europe's Eastern Promise.
Diplomacy in an Age of Faith.
Reconsidering Revaluation. (cover story)
The New Israel and the Old.
Containing Climate Change.
Stopping Nuclear Terrorism.
Making Intervention Work.
A Partnership of Equals.
The Copenhagen Consensus.
Western Hemisphere.
The Future of North America.
Keeping Up With Asia.
Rethinking the National Interest. (cover story)
The Land of Hope Again?
Morning in Latin America.
The Costs of Containing Iran.
In the Tank.
The Democratic Rollback.
America's Priorities in the War on Terror.
Separatism's Final Country.
The September 12 Paradigm.
Us and Them.
Building a New Atlantic Alliance.
Staying Alive.
The Myth of the Authoritarian Model.
China and India Go to Africa.
Public Footprints in Private Markets.
How Chávez Has Helped the Poor.
A Strategic Economic Engagement.
China's New Dictatorship Diplomacy. (cover story)
Global Corporate Citizenship.
Long Time Coming. (cover story)
Walk Before Running.
A New Realism.
Millions Uprooted.
How Chávez Has Helped the Poor.
Organized Labor along Savannah's Waterfront: Mutual Cooperation among Black and White Longshoremen, 1865-1894.
Sovereign or Suzerain: Alexander McGillivray's Argument for Creek Independence after the Treaty of Paris of 1783.
Self-Determination, Politics, and Gender on Georgia's Black College Campuses, 1875-1900.
William Stephens versus Thomas Stephens: A Family Feud in Colonial Georgia.
The Bitter Trial of Defeat and Emancipation: Reconstruction in Bartow County, Georgia, 1865-1872.
Notes and Documents.
The Georgia Confederate Flag Dispute.
Georgia Photographers: The First Generation, 1840-1860.
Does Foreign Aid Fuel Palestinian Violence?
The Revolutionary Guards' Role in Iranian Politics.
Ahmadinejad and the Mahdi.
Did Edward Said Really Speak Truth to Power?
Fatah's Embrace of Islamism.
Tactical Hudna and Islamist Intolerance.
Is Al-Qaeda's Central Leadership Still Relevant?
Exposing the "Flying Imams".
The Middle East's Tribal DNA.
Scientific Training and Radical Islam.
The Economics of Democracy in Muslim Countries.
Where Is Bashar al-Assad Heading?
An Israeli Watershed: Strike on Syria.
European Converts to Terrorism.
Iran's Revolutionary Guards--A Rogue Outfit?
Delhi: Between Tehran and Washington.
A Land without a People for a People without a Land.
The Costs of Relying on Aging Dictators.
The Islamic Republic's Economic Failure.
The Psychological Asymmetry of Islamist Warfare.
Sovereign Wealth Funds: Investment Vehicles for the Persian Guff Countries.
The Rise of the Chechen Emirate?
Jail for Iranian Journalists.
From Mission "Africa Rooms": Frans M. Olbrechts's Rediscovered African Collection.
PAINTERS, BLACKSMITHS AND WORDSMITHS: BUILDING MOLUES IN LAGOS.
The (Dis)placement of National Art in a Transnational Artworld.
African Art at the Museum of Ethnography in Geneva (MEG).
Couples or Doubles?
El Anatsui.
UMOR REVISITED: A DIACHRONIC STUDY OF SACROSANCT PRINCIPLES EMBEDDED IN THE YAKURR LEBOKU FESTIVAL.
Image Ethics in and about Africa.
TRANSFORMING SYMBOLIC IDENTITY: WALL ART AND THE SOUTH AFRICAN CITY.
Twins, Hermaphrodites, and an Androgynous Albino Deity.
Sufi Sheikhs, Sheikhas, and Saints of the Sudan.
Doubles and Twins. (cover story)
Masks, Myths, Novels, and Symbolic Ambiguity.
Èjìwàpò.
Buffalo Helmets of Tussian and Siemu Peoples of Burkina Faso.
Observing Komo among Tagwa People in Burkina Faso: A Burkinabe Art Historian's Views.
Temne Twins (Tà-bàri) Should Share Everything.
Africa Remix Remix.
Regionalist Radio: Thomas Hart Benton on Art for Your Sake.
Constructing the Guru: Ritual Authority and Architectural Space in Medieval India.
Attributing Influence: The Problem of Female Patronage in Fifteenth-Century Florence.
The Republic at Work: S. Marco's Reliefs of the Venetian Trades.
Meaningful Mingling: Classicizing Imagery and Islamicizing Script in a Byzantine Bowl.
AFTERWORD: STOLEN TIME.
A Portfolio Model for Music Educators.
Developing Leadership in the Ensemble Classroom.
Mimes and Conductors: Silent Artists.
Boys' Changing Voices in the First Century of MENC Journals.
Successful Single-Sex Offerings in the Choral Department.
The Implementation of the National Standards in Music Education: Capturing the Spirit of the Standards.
The Relationship between the Physical Aspects of Voice Production and Optimal Vocal Health.
Steel Bands in American Schools: What They Are, What They Do, and Why They're Growing!
Conjunto in the Classroom.
News and Information for Music Educators.
Preventing Music-Induced Hearing Loss.
Bridging Musical Understanding through Multicultural Musics.
A Kaleidoscopic View of the Harlem Renaissance.
Student-Centered Instruction: Involving Students in Their Own Education.
Musical America: United yet Varied Identities for Classroom Use.
A Century of Women's Bands in America.
Stress in the Lives of Music Students.
Adopting a Healthy Approach to Instrumental Music Making.
A Vision for the Future: Looking at the Standards.
Korean Folk Music in Your Curriculum.
Instrumental Music Experiences from Mexico.
Promoting Musical Health, Enhancing Musical Performance: Wellness for Music Students.
Learning from Lexington.
Leaving Prague: A Notebook.
THE HETEROTOPIC SPACES OF POSTCOLONIAL TRAUMA IN MICHAEL ONDAATJE'S ANIL'S GHOST.
THIS TEXT DELETES ITSELF: TRAUMATIC MEMORY AND SPACE-TIME IN ZOË WICOMB'S DAVID'S STORY.
THE TRANS/HISTORICITY OF TRAUMA IN JEANNETTE ARMSTRONG'S SLASH AND SHERMAN ALEXIE'S INDIAN KILLER.
MORTGAGED FUTURES: TRAUMA, SUBJECTIVITY, AND THE LEGACIES OF COLONIALISM IN TSITSI DANGAREMBGA'S THE BOOK OF NOT.
THE CURSE OF CONSTANT REMEMBRANCE: THE BELATED TRAUMA OF THE SLAVE TRADE IN AYI KWEI ARMAH'S FRAGMENTS.
YOU WOULD NOT ADD TO MY SUFFERING IF YOU KNEW WHAT I HAVE SEEN: HOLOCAUST TESTIMONY AND CONTEMPORARY AFRICAN TRAUMA LITERATURE.
LINKING LEGACIES OF LOSS: TRAUMATIC HISTORIES AND CROSS-CULTURAL EMPATHY IN CARYL PHILLIPS'S HIGHER GROUND AND THE NATURE OF BLOOD.
DECOLONIZING TRAUMA STUDIES: A RESPONSE.
WHO SPEAKS? WHO LISTENS?: THE PROBLEM OF ADDRESS IN TWO NIGERIAN TRAUMA NOVELS.
INTRODUCTION: POSTCOLONIAL TRAUMA NOVELS.
JOURNEYING THROUGH HELL: WOLE SOYINKA, TRAUMA, AND POSTCOLONIAL NIGERIA.
APARTHEID HAUNTS: POSTCOLONIAL TRAUMA IN LISA FUGARD'S SKINNER'S DRIFT.
THE PAST IN THE PRESENT: PERSONAL AND COLLECTIVE TRAUMA IN ACHMAT DANGOR'S BITTER FRUIT.
YOU YOUR BEST THING, SETHE: TRAUMA'S NARCISSISM.
RELEGATION AND REBELLION: THE QUEER, THE GROTESQUE, AND THE SILENT IN THE FICTION OF CARSON McCULLERS.
Point of View: In Teaching Composition, 'Formulaic' Is Not a Four-Letter Word.
'Ethnic' writing for a broad audience.
Set your characters in their TIME & PLACE. (cover story)
Create a sleuth for the LONG HAUL.
How to create emotional landscapes.
'A good script moves me.'.
Ah, the fine art of SELF-SABOTAGE.
CONFLICT what your readers want and your fiction needs.
Entering the dream of a MEMOIR.
13 strategies to get you through a DRY SPELL.
Make your readers STICK AROUND.
Techniques to TANTALIZE.
Commissions challenge journalistic principles.
Blend history & imagination.
How to win over an editor.
'Feel-good' stories warm the heart.
Correct usage is often a judgment call.
CHILLED to the BONE.
The strange business of CHEMISTRY in WRITING.
Develop characters from the INSIDE OUT.
The MIDLISTERS--backbone of the publishing industry.
THE Boss Is Watching.
Full Court Coverage.
Electing to Litigate.
NEWSMAKERS OF THE YEAR 2007 & 2008.
THE ROLE OF EPISTEMIC COMMUNITIES IN OFFERING NEW COOPERATION FRAMEWORKS IN THE EUPHRATES-TIGRIS RIVERS SYSTEM.
WATER WARS: OBSCURING OPPORTUNITIES.
CLIMATE CHANGE AND WATER RESOURCES: THE CHALLENGES AHEAD.
WATER AND GENDER: THE UNEXPECTED CONNECTION THAT REALLY MATTERS.
A MISSED CHANCE FOR PEACE: ISRAEL AND SYRIA'S NEGOTIATIONS OVER THE GOLAN HEIGHTS.
FROM UNIVERSAL PRESCRIPTIONS TO LIVING RIGHTS: LOCAL AND INDIGENOUS WATER RIGHTS CONFRONT PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN THE ANDES.
WATER POLITICS IN SOUTH ASIA: TECHNOCRATIC COOPERATION AND LASTING SECURITY IN THE INDUS BASIN AND BEYOND.
ON THIN ICE: WATER RIGHTS AND RESOURCE DISPUTES IN THE ARCTIC OCEAN.
WATER, SANITATION AND THE MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS.
WATER IN THE 21ST CENTURY: DEFINING THE ELEMENTS OF GLOBAL CRISES AND POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS.
THE POTENTIAL AND PROMISE OF WATER PRICING.
MISSION NOT YET ACCOMPLISHED: MANAGING WATER RESOURCES IN THE NILE RIVER BASIN.
THE FORGOTTEN INFRASTRUCTURE: SAFEGUARDING FRESHWATER ECOSYSTEMS.
CHALLENGES AND REALITIES OF WATER MANAGEMENT OF MEGACITIES: THE CASE OF MEXICO CITY METROPOLITAN AREA.
HEALING THE ENLIGHTENMENT RIFT: RATIONALITY SPIRITUALITY AND SHARED WATERS.
EDITORS' FORWARD.
FINANCIAL DIPLOMACY AND THE CREDIT CRUNCH: THE RISE OF CENTRAL BANKS.
A NEO-WESTPHALIAN INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL SYSTEM?
GOVERNMENTS AS MARKET PLAYERS: STATE INNOVATION IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY.
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT AND INTERSTATE MILITARY CONFLICT.
THE U.S. CAMPAIGN TO SQUEEZE TERRORISTS' FINANCING.
WHAT IS THE GOVERNMENT'S ROLE IN PROMOTING MORALS?…SERIOUSLY?
MORALITY IN EIGHTH AMENDMENT JURISPRUDENCE.
ON THE FOUNDATIONS AND NATURE OF MORALITY.
HOW TO REVERSE GOVERNMENT IMPOSITION OF IMMORALITY: A STRATEGY FOR ERODING ROE V. WADE.
WHY PHYLLIS SCHLAFLY IS RIGHT (BUT WRONG) ABOUT PORNOGRAPHY.
A FOUNDER'S RETROSPECTIVE: THE JOURNAL AT 30 YEARS.
METHODOLOGY, PROPORTIONALITY, EQUALITY: WHICH MORAL QUESTION DOES THE EIGHTH AMENDMENT POSE?
PREFACE.
DRED SCOTT REVISITED.
GOVERNMENT PROMOTION OF MORAL ISSUES: GAMBLING, SMOKING, AND ADVERTISING.
GAY SEX AND MARRIAGE, THE RECIPROCAL DISADVANTAGE PROBLEM, AND THE CRISIS IN LIBERAL CONSTITUTIONAL THEORY.
MARRIAGE FACTS.
THE MORALITY OF FIRST AMENDMENT JURISPRUDENCE.
MODESTY AND MORALISM: JUSTICE, PRUDENCE, AND ABORTION--A REPLY TO SKEEL & STUNTZ.
MORAL DUTY AND THE RULE OF LAW.
MORAL CHOICES, MORAL TRUTH, AND THE EIGHTH AMENDMENT.
NATURAL LAW.
THE FEDERALIST APPROACH TO THE FIRST AMENDMENT.
We are not all the same.
A class act to follow.
Bringing up children to survive in the city.
Rooms for improvement.
Shooting from the HIP.
Recovery and mental health.
NEWS IN BRIEF.
Poverty: Just a fact of modern life?
The same old story.
PARC life.
Epidermoid carcinoma involving the parotid gland and orbita! region: Case report of a rare entity.
Fibrous dysplasia of the temporal bone complicated by cholesteatoma and thrombophlebitis of the transverse and sigmoid sinuses: A case report.
Epistaxis and its relationship to handedness with use of intranasal steroid spray.
Near-complete tracheal ring deformity: A case report.
Marginal-zone B-cell lymphoma of the bony palate presenting as sinusitis.
Head and neck manifestations of lymphogranuloma venereum.
Giant mastoid osteoma with postoperative high-frequency sensorineural hearing loss.
Office CO&lt;sub&gt;2&lt;/sub&gt; laser turbinoplasty.
An unusual case of adult airway obstruction from a lymphovenous malformation.
Congenital familial bilateral branchial tracts: A rare case.
Reduction of snoring with a plasma-mediated radiofrequency-based ablation (Coblation) device.
Aggressive papillary tumor of the middle ear: A true entity or an endolymphatic sac neoplasm?
Tension pneumocephalus after endoscopic sinus surgery: Case report of repair and management in absence of obvious skull base defect.
Successful treatment of invasive Aspergillus sinusitis with caspofungin and voriconazole.
Isolated lingual mucormycosis in an infant with Down syndrome.
The etiology of recurrent chordoma presenting as a neck mass: Metastasis vs. surgical pathway seeding.
Gentamicin injections for Ménière disease: Comparison of subjective and objective end points.
Unilateral inferior turbinate hypoplasia caused by a longstanding (approximately 35 yr) nasal foreign body.
Results of exploratory tympanotomy following sudden unilateral deafness and its effects on hearing restoration.
Management of hypopharyngeal and esophageal perforations in children: Three case reports and a review of the literature.
Safety and efficacy of pressure-assisted tissue-welding tonsillectomy: A preliminary evaluation.
Neurosarcoidosis presenting as complicated sinusitis: A case report and review.
Expression of PCNA and bcl-2 in basaloid squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx: A controlled study.
Extracanalicular osteoma of the temporal bone.
Neuroendocrine carcinoma of the jugular foramen.
Bilateral multinodular oncocytomas of the parotid arising in a background of bilateral oncocytic nodular hyperplasia.
Cavernous hemangioma of the middle turbinate: A case report.
The safety of outpatient U PPP for obstructive sleep apnea: A retrospective review of 40 cases.
Auditory brainstem response threshold differences in patients with vestibular schwannoma: A new diagnostic index.
Transcervical resection of the styloid process in Eagle syndrome.
Tracheal diverticulum: A rare finding in a patient with worsening chronic cough.
Intratracheal ectopic thyroid tissue presenting with protracted airway obstruction: A case report.
Enophthalmos in silent sinus syndrome.
A preliminary study of the effectiveness of an otolaryngology-based multidisciplinary falls prevention clinic.
Mastoiditis on MRI: Fact or artifact?
Juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma: Spontaneous resolution.
Prevalence of autoimmune thyroid disease in chronic rhinitis.
Rehabilitation of the olfactory sense after laryngectomy: Long-term use of the larynx bypass.
Assessments of the size of tympanic membrane perforations: A comparison of clinical estimations with video-otoscopic calculations.
Resveratrol protects auditory hair cells from gentamicin toxicity.
An alternative treatment for facial nerve tumors: Short-term results of radiotherapy.
Superior turbinate pneumatization in patients with chronic rhinosinusitis: Prevalence on paranasal sinus CT.
Squamous cell carcinoma of the buccal mucosa: A retrospective analysis of 22 cases.
Sinonasal mycetoma.
Adenosquamous carcinoma of the nasal cavity.
An approach to tinnitus management.
Aspergillus otomycosis in an immunocompromised patient.
Nasal packing after septoplasty: A randomized comparison of packing versus no packing in 88 patients.
A hemangioma on the floor of the mouth presenting as a ranula.
Analysis of radiation therapy for the control of Merkel cell carcinoma of the head and neck based on 36 cases and a literature review.
BUYERS GUIDE.
Making it Work: The Application of Time as a Public Health Control in the Field.
The Relevance of Problem-Based Instruction to Learning about Environmental Health.
The Performance of UASB Reactors Treating High-Strength Wastewaters.
Septic Tank Additive Impacts on Microbial Populations.
Behavioral Science and Food Safety.
Public Health: Seattle and King County's Push for the Built Environment.
A Novel Technology to Improve Drinking Water Quality Using Natural Treatment Methods in Rural Tanzania.
Determination of the Feasibility of Using a Portable X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Analyzer in the field for Measurement of Lead Content of Sieved Soil.
The View-Master Health Study Focus Groups.
EH Update.
The Role of Environmental Health in Disaster Management: A Qualitative Study of Australian Experiences.
Potential Health Effects Associated with Residential Proximity to Freeways and Primary Roads: Review of Scientific Literature, 1999-2006.
Survival and Growth of Fodborne Microorganisms in Processed and Individually Wrapped Cheese Slices.
Shipshape: Sanitation Inspections on Cruise Ships, 1990-2005, Vessel Sanitation Program, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Tool Created to Assess Health Impacts of Development Decisions in Ingham County, Michigan.
Cryptosporidiosis Outbreak in a Nassau County, Florida, Return Travel Group from Ireland, May 24,2006-June 4,2006.
Differential Impacts of Smoke-Free Laws on Indoor Air Quality.
Tri-County Health Department in Colorado Does More Than Just Review a Development Plan.
Health-Related Quality of Life and Recognition of Desertification Among Inhabitants of the Loess Plateau Region of China: Findings for City and Village Communities.
Construction and Demolition (C&D) Landfills: Emerging Public and Occupational Health Issues.
Randomized Controlled Trials in Environmental Health Research: Ethical Issues.
Smart Growth and Health for the Future: "Our Course of Action" Delaware County, Ohio.
Antimicrobial Resistance in Escherichia coli Isolated in Wastewater and Sludge from Poultry Slaughterhouse Wastewater Plants.
Relationship between Particulate Matter Measured by Optical Particle Counter and Mortality in Seoul, Korea, during 2001.
Environmental Health Specialists' Self-Reported Foodborne Illness Outbreak Investigation Practices.
Assessing Emergency Response Training Needs of Local Environmental Health Professionals.
Arsenic Exposure and Childhood Cancer -- A Systematic Review of the Literature.
Outbreak of Giardiasis and Cryptosporidiosis Associated with a Neighborhood Interactive Water Fountain-Florida, 2006.
A Review of Enteric Outbreaks in Child Care Centers: Effective Infection Control Recommendations.
Estimated Risks of Water and Saliva Contamination by Phthalate Diffusion from Plasticized Polyvinyl Chloride.
Arsenic and Bladder Cancer: Observations and Suggestions.
Featured article Quiz #2 "Outbreak of Giardiasis and Cryptosporidiosis Associated with a Neighborhood Interactive Water Fountain--Florida, 2006"
Healthy Housing Inspection Manual Now Available.
The Future of Children's Environmental Health: Coping with Global Warming.
In Defense of Technicians.
Environmental Health and Land Use Planning: In Search of a Paradigm in Bernalillo County, New Mexico.
Environmental Health Net.
Practical Stuff!
The Alamosa Salmonella Outbreak: A Gumshoe Investigation.
Products & Services.
Who Are They? What Do They Do? How Do I Get There?
Emerging Models for Nitrogen Removal in Treatment Wetlands.
Evaluating the Vulnerability of Bored and Driven Wells in a Shallow I in on fined Aquifer.
Microbial Water Quality and Influences of Fecal Accumulation from a Dog Exercise Area.
Truth in a Time of War.
Confluences: As a beloved uncle makes his final journey in the wilderness, a new life begins.
The Broken Balance.
Trapped in a Golden Age.
Who Cares About Executive Supremacy? The scope of presidential power is the most urgent—and fundamentally ignored—legal and political issue of our time.
The Liberal Imagination of Frederick Douglass.
Cuss Time: By limiting freedom of expression, we take away thoughts and ideas before they have the opportunity to hatch.
Balanchine's Cabinet: A young woman wins a drawing and learns to give and to receive.
No End in Sight.
Passing the Torch. (cover story)
Alone at the Movies: My days in the dark with Robert Altman and Woody Allen.
Dreaming of a Democratic Russia: Memories of a year in Moscow promoting a post-Soviet political process, an undertaking that now seems futile.
The New Old Way of Learning Languages.
Moral Principle vs. Military Necessity: The first code of conduct during warfare, created by a Civil War—era Prussian immigrant, reflected ambiguities we struggle with to this day.
From the Trash Can of Poetry.
Benny Andersen. The Pillows and Selected Stories.
Confessions of a Lapsed Vegetarian.
Blind Imagination: Pictures into Words.
The Russian Response to Modernity: Crystal Palace, Eiffel Tower, Brooklyn Bridge.
Soulful Modernism.
Venetian Ghosts: A Memoir.
Celebrity Bodies.
What News on the Rialto?.
Similes.
Quarreling Frost, Northeast of Eden.
Empty Slates: Looking for the Past in Texas and Ukraine.
Renewal.
enhancing the curriculum using primary sources: women engaged in war.
a whole new library: six "senses" you can use to make sense of new standards and guidelines.
resources for the literacy leader.
learning about literacy: from theories to trends.
connecting the digital dots: literacy of the 21st century.
hear and now: connecting outstanding audiobooks to library and classroom instruction.
from stereopticon to Google: technology and school library standards.
standards! standards! standards!
the teacher-librarian as literacy leader.
digital photo safaris: authentic learning across the curriculum.
product placement: facing yet another dark art.
WOULD YOU BUY A USED WAR FROM THIS MAN?
The Templeton Fundies.
The Moon Doth Shine as Bright as Day.
FIGHTING FOR IRAQ: A CASE FOR LIBERATION.
THE TWO-HEADED CALF..
ABSOLUTE INFIDEL: THE EVOLUTION OF AYAAN HIRIS ALI.
Living off the Land.
Of Pastors and Presidents: Securing a Secular Bully Pulpit.
EMERGING WATER SHORTAGES.
BLOOD CHOCOLATE.
RIPPING INTO THE BIBLE.
FROM CATHOLIC PRIEST TO ATHEIST PSYCHOLOGIST.
Utopia Isn't So Bad.
MAPPING METAPHOR: This is Your Brain on Figurative Language.
The TROUBLE with PAKISTAN. (cover story)
EXQUISITE DEBATE: DAWKINS vs. GOULD.
SPECIAL REPORT: Commission on Civil Rights Examines Prisoner's Free Exercise of Religion.
Waste Not: The Facts about Indirect Potable Reuse.
Dedicated Writers.
Collision of RELIGIOUS and GAY RIGHTS in the Workplace.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Still Ahead of Its Time?
How Deep Is Your Love?
THE ACCIDENTAL ATHEIST: From Hippie to Humanist in Half a Century.
In Pursuit of the "God Particle.".
MIGRANT, TOURIST, PILGRIM, MONK: MOBILITY AND IDENTITY IN A GLOBAL AGE.
DE LUBAC AND LONERGAN ON THE SUPERNATURAL.
HOMOSEXUALITY AND THE COUNSEL OF THE CROSS: A CLARIFICATION.
GLOBALIZING SOLIDARITY: CHRISTIAN ANTHROPOLOGY AND THE CHALLENGE OF HUMAN LIBERATION.
TRULY HUMAN SEXUAL ACTS: A RESPONSE TO PATRICK LEE AND ROBERT GEORGE.
ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS.
HUGH OF ST. VICTOR ON "JESUS WEPT": COMPASSION AS IDEAL HUMANITAS.
THE TRUE ULTIMATE END OF HUMAN BEINGS: THE KINGDOM, NOT GOD ALONE.
INTERPRETING VATICAN II: "A NEW PENTECOST.".
BETWEEN IDENTITY AND SECURITY: THEOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS OF MIGRATION IN THE CONTEXT OF GLOBALIZATION.
THE THEOLOGY AND TIMES OF WILLIAM OF TRIPOLI, O.P.: A DIFFERENT VIEW OF ISLAM.
CRISES AND OTHER DEVELOPMENTS.
ECONOMIC GLOBALIZATION AND ASIAN CONTEXTUAL THEOLOGY.
WHEN "MEATS ARE LIKE MEDICINES": VITORIA AND LESSIUS ON THE ROLE OF FOOD IN THE DUTY TO PRESERVE LIFE.
NEOLIBERAL GLOBALIZATION: CRITIQUES AND ALTERNATIVES.
THE MEANING OF SUBSISTIT IN AS EXPLAINED BY THE CONGREGATION FOR THE DOCTRINE OF THE FAITH.
GLOBALIZATION WITH A HUMAN FACE: CATHOLIC SOCIAL TEACHING AND GLOBALIZATION.
SUBSIDIARITY AND SPHERE-SOVEREIGNTY: A MATCH MADE IN…?
WHAT MALE-FEMALE COMPLEMENTARITY MAKES POSSIBLE: MARRIAGE AS A TWO-IN-ONE-FLESH UNION.
GLOBALIZATION'S SHIFTING ECONOMIC AND MORAL TERRAIN: CONTESTING MARKETPLACE MORES.
Guest Editorial.
THE SACRAMENTAL WORLD IN THE SENTENCES OF PETER LOMBARD.
AN AFRICAN MORAL THEOLOGY OF INCULTURATION: METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS.
HEALTH AND HUMAN RIGHTS.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
TIME, JUDGMENT, AND COMPETITIVE SPIRITUALITY: A READING OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE DOCTRINE OF PURGATORY.
DOUBT AND THE RESURRECTION OF JESUS.
GOD, CREATION, AND THE POSSIBILITY OF PHILOSOPHICAL WISDOM: THE PERSPECTIVES OF BONAVENTURE AND AQUINAS.
Ecosystems in Action: Lessons from Marine Ecology about Recovery, Resistance, and Reversibility.
Beyond Urban Legends: An Emerging Framework of Urban Ecology, as Illustrated by the Baltimore Ecosystem Study.
The US Ethanol and Biofuels Boom: Its Origins, Current Status, and Future Prospects.
The Green Algal Underground: Evolutionary Secrets of Desert Cells.
New Tools to Meet New Challenges: Emerging Technologies for Managing Marine Ecosystems for Resilience.
One Giant Leap: How Insects Achieved Altruism and Colonial Life. (cover story)
Biodiversity Congruence and Conservation Strategies: A National Test.
On Antarctic Ice: Life at Low Diversity.
Penguins as Marine Sentinels.
Resilience, Robustness, and Marine Ecosystem-based Management.
Genetic Literacy of Undergraduate Non-Science Majors and the Impact of Introductory Biology and Genetics Courses.
Rotenone: An Essential but Demonized Tool for Assessing Marine Fish Diversity.
The Calamity of So Long Life: Life Histories, Contaminants, and Potential Emerging Threats to Long-lived Vertebrates.
Long-term Agricultural Research: A Research, Education, and Extension Imperative.
Permafrost in Flux: Tracking Carbon in the Alaskan Tundra.
Transgene Escape Monitoring, Population Genetics, and the Law.
High-Speed Developments in Avian Genomics.
Marine Ecosystem-based Management in Practice: Scientific and Governance Challenges.
The Demise of Fire and "Mesophication" of Forests in the Eastern United States.
Controls on Annual Forest Carbon Storage: Lessons from the Past and Predictions for the Future.
Plant Diversity in the Human Diet: Weak Phylogenetic Signal Indicates Breadth.
Assessment of Research Performance in Biology: How Well Do Peer Review and Bibliometry Correlate?
Nonnative Species and Bioenergy: Are We Cultivating the Next Invader?
How Ecofriendly Are Wind Farms?
Progress in the Ecological Genetics and Biodiversity of Freshwater Bacteria.
The Green Revolution Arrives in Africa.
Animal Reservoirs: Harboring the Next Pandemic.
Causes and Consequences of Sociality in Bats. (cover story)
Walking the Line between Lab and Computation: The "Moist" Zone.
Deforestation, Mosquitoes, and Ancient Rome: Lessons for Today.
AlBS news.
Biodiversity Hotspot: The Florida Panhandle.
Fungal Community Ecology: A Hybrid Beast with a Molecular Master.
Consequences of More Extreme Precipitation Regimes for Terrestrial Ecosystems.
computing.
computing.
ROBOTS OF THE SEA.
in-school analysis.
computing.
putting the cool in school.
DIVIDED BY a common language.
working backward.
computing.
why hands matter.
technology focus.
Birds of a Different Feather.
Hearts and Flowers.
Spacecraft Behaving Badly.
Far from the forests of the night.
How Dogs Came to Run the World. (cover story)
A Change in the Weather.
Photographing Water in Landscapes.
Sabah.
Off to the Sun: PSA goes to Mexico.
Symphony of Light. (cover story)
Photographing Athletes.
Drury's Digital Diary.
A Dynamic Interactive Process for PSA Inter-club Competitions.
High-Key/Low-Key.
Oregon Coast Odyssey.
A Different Kind of Street Photography.
Digital Infrared Photography.
Who's Who IN PHOTOGRAPHY 2007.
Nature.
Exhibitions.
PSA Camera Clubs and Community Service.
ROPA PSA Recognition of Photographic Achievement 1997 - 2008.
2008 PSA Youth Showcase.
Distinctive Image.
Feature Photography and Photojournalism.
Just for fun... What type of photographer are you?
News.
Exhibitions.
Drury's Digital Diary.
PSA 2008 Honors.
Petra.
Model Program: Unionville High School, Kennett Square, PA.
Model Program: High Point Regional High School, Sussex, NJ.
Evildoer or Do-Gooder: Getting the Goods on Ozone.
Model Program: West Springfield High School, Virginia.
A Tech Ed Newsletter Challenge.
Journeys on the Rivers and Oceans: Ship Transportation.
An Estimating Challenge.
Space: The New Frontier!
Scrap Metal Recycling.
Excite Kids About Engineering.
Monuments: Landmarks and Reflections of the Past.
The Flag Design Challenge.
One Sound is Worth a Thousand Words: Using and Understanding Audio Files.
Engineering Student Outcomes for Grades 9 - 12.
Electronic Sensors: Making the Connection.
Motor Mania: Revving Up For Technological Design.
Avenues to Success--Developing a Thriving Technology Education Program.
2008 Leaders to Watch.
Integration of Supportive Design Features and Technology.
Visual Perception and the HSV Color System: Exploring Color in the Communications Technology Classroom.
Maximizing the Learning Value of Tests in Technology Education Classes: A Summary of Research Findings.
Calendar.
TIDE News.
Calendar.
Recapturing the Past with Digital Imaging.
Communication Technology: The Magic of Touch. (cover story)
Creating Standards-Based Technology Education Facilities.
Pothole Repair Challenge.
Model Program: Seymour High School, IN.
TIDE News.
Producing Television Commercials in High School Technology Education: An Authentic Standards-Based Project.
Offshore Oil Drilling: Buying Energy Independence or Buying Time?
Soft Skills in the Technology Education Classroom: What Do Students Need?
Stepping Outside My Technology Classroom Box. (cover story)
Energy Perspective: Is Hydroelectricity Green? (cover story)
English Language Learner Engineering Collaborative.
IED Cleanup: A Cooperative Classroom Robotics Challenge.
STEM, STEM Education, STEMmania.
An Exploratory Study of Student Perspectives.
The Lived Experience of Community College Students Enrolled in High-Risk Online Courses.
Do University Centers Produce Comparable Teacher Education Candidates?
Editor's Note.
College Hopping: Exploring the Occurrence, Frequency, and Consequences of Lateral Transfer.
Examining the Relationship Between Class Scheduling and Student Achievement in College Algebra.
Maneuvering the Role as a Community College Artist-Educator.
Perpetuation of Racial Comfort and Discomfort at a Community College.
Predictors of Transfer to 4-Year, For-Profit Institutions.
Financial Aid and Persistence in Community Colleges: Assessing the Effectiveness of Federal and State Financial Aid Programs in Oklahoma.
The Denominator as the "Target".
The Importance of Funding Postsecondary Correctional Educational Programs.
Institutional Contradiction in the Community College.
Perpetuation of Racial Comfort and Discomfort at a Community College.
Predictors of Transfer to 4-Year, For-Profit Institutions.
Promoting Success by Addressing Students' Fear of Failure.
Online Education and Organizational Change.
LESSON ORGANIZATION: BIG VISION STEP-BY-STEP EXECUTION.
A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE MODELS OF TEACHER EDUCATION IN TERMS OF TEACHING PRACTICES IN THE USA, ENGLAND, AND TURKEY.
DEVELOPING A CURRICULUM FOR ON-LINE INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS DEGREE: AN INTEGRATED APPROACH USING SYSTEMS AND ERP CONCEPTS.
AN ISLAMIC PERSPECTIVE ON ENVIRONMENTAL LITERACY.
RELATION BETWEEN ASPECTS OF MOTHER'S PERSONALITY AND CHILDREN'S BEHAVIOR DISORDERS.
PROSPECTIVE TEACHERS EXPERIENCES TEACHING MATHEMATICS TO AFRICAN AMERICAN MALES.
UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH ASSISTANTSHIP: A COMPARISON OF BENEFITS AND COSTS FROM FACULTY AND STUDENTS' PERSPECTIVES.
COGNITIVE AND SOCIAL CONSTRUCTIVISM: DEVELOPING TOOLS FOR AN i EFFECTIVE CLASSROOM.
SUPERVISING THE STUDENT TEACHER IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOL.
EXAMINING EFFECTIVE TEACHING VIA A SOCIAL CONSTRUCTIVE PEDAGOGY "CASE STUDY"
THE USE OF THE WELSH INCLUSION MODEL AND ITS EFFECT ON ELEMENTARY SCHOOL STUDENTS.
AN INVESTIGATION OF THE INSTRUCTIONAL PEDAGOGY AND ASSESSMENT STRATEGIES USED BY TEACHER EDUCATORS IN TWO UNIVERSITIES WITHIN A STATE SYSTEM OF HIGHER EDUCATION.
RESPONSE TO INTERVENTION: THE FUNCTIONAL ASSESSMENT OF CHILDREN RETURNING TO SCHOOL WITH TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY.
ELEMENTARY-SCHOOL MATHEMATICS INSTRUCTION AND ACHIEVEMENT OF FOURTH-GRADE STUDENTS IN JAPAN: FINDINGS FROM THE TIMSS 2007 ASSESSMENT.
AN EVALUATION OF CHANGES IN THE CURRICULUM IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL LEVEL IN TURKEY.
JOB SATISFACTION OF EXPERIENCED PROFESSORS AT A LIBERAL ARTS COLLEGE.
A STUDY OF HIGH SCHOOL DROPOUT PREVENTION AND AT-RISK NINTH GRADERS' ROLE MODELS AND MOTIVATIONS FOR SCHOOL COMPLETION.
AN INTEGRATION OF "BACKWARDS PLANNING" UNIT DESIGN WITH THE "TWO-STEP" LESSON PLANNING FRAMEWORK.
MODELING SECONDARY INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGIES IN A TEACHER EDUCATION CLASS.
ASSESSING THE COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY OF SOCIAL STUDIES TEACHERS IN SELECTED SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN SOUTH CENTRAL NIGERIA.
Detecting Differential Person Functioning in Emotional Intelligence.
The Effect of Perspective on Misconceptions in Psychology: A Test of Conceptual Change Theory.
Transformational Leadership in the Classroom: Fostering Student Learning, Student Participation, and Teacher Credibility.
Facing Reality: What Are Doctoral Students' Chances for Success?
An IT Manager's View on E-mail and Policies and Procedures.
Numerical Conceptions Reflected During Multiage Child-Initiated Pretend Play.
Peer Group Counselling and School Influence on Adolescents' Self-Concept.
Classroom Instructional Strategies and Science Career Interest for Adolescent Students in Korea: Results from the TIMSS 2003 Assessment.
Orienting Student Using a Case-based Instructional Approach: A Case Study.
The Effectiveness of National Board Certified Teachers: Policy Implications.
Using Self-Instruction to Teach Counseling Skills to School Psychology Students: An Efficacy Study.
The Practice of Information Processing Model in the Teaching of Cognitive Strategies.
Negative Behavior of Teachers With Regard to High School Students in Classroom Settings.
You Do What You Are: The Relationship Between the Scale of Creative Attributes and Behavior and Vocational Interests.
Research Use of Clinical Measures for Anxiety in the Recent Psychological Literature.
What Happens When Two Cultures Meet in the Classroom?
Setting Up the On-Site Marriage and Family Therapy Clinical Training Course.
Who Do You Know? Demonstrating Networking in a Careers in Psychology Course.
Building Interpersonal Relationships as a Key to Effective Speaking Center Consultations.
Measuring Mathematics Anxiety: Psychometric Analysis of a Bidimensional Affective Scale.
Professional Human Service Occupation Biases Represented in General Psychology Textbooks.
Teaching Mental Skills for Self-Esteem Enhancement in a Military Healthcare Setting.
Bridging the Gap: Reaching First-Generation Students in the Classroom.
Concurrent Validity Between Teacher Efficacy and Perceptions of Response to Intervention Outcomes.
Giving University Students Incentives to do Homework Improves their Performance.
Effect of Learner-Centered Education on the Academic Outcomes of Minority Groups.
Design Principles of Worked Examples: A Review of the Empirical Studies.
Does Your Elementary Mathematics Methodology Class Correspond to Constructivist Epistemology?
Calibrating a Measure of Gender Differences in Motivation for Learning Technology.
An Evaluation of the Aims of the Faculty School Partnership Sheme by Mathematics Student Teachers and their Mentors.
Rating Teachers of Social Studies Instruction.
Cursive Writing: Are Its Last Days Approaching?
Learning Style and The Special Needs Child.
Index.
Star Trek.
William Shakespeare's Twelfth Night.
The Blind Side.
Amelia.
Fame.
Romeo & Juliet.
Around the World at 17.
The Dark Pond.
Breaking Through.
Meeting Nelson Mandela.
Writing With Walter.
One to Watch.
Teens Are Boss.
Sitting and Soaring.
King of Comedy.
Connection Disconnect.
Power of Art.
AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAMS FOR ADOLESCENTS: A REVIEW OF EVALUATION RESEARCH.
TRADING PLACES: ADOLESCENTS AS TEACHERS.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE MEASURES OF BEHAVIOR IN ADOLESCENT GIRLS.
DIFFERENCES IN SELF-REPORTED DISCLOSURE OF COLLEGE EXPERIENCES BY FIRST-GENERATION COLLEGE STUDENT STATUS.
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN PARENTAL ALCOHOL ABUSE AND SOCIAL SUPPORT, PEER SUBSTANCE ABUSE RISK AND SOCIAL SUPPORT, AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE RISK AMONG SOUTH KOREAN ADOLESCENTS.
IS ALWAYS AUTHORITATIVE THE OPTIMUM PARENTING STYLE? EVIDENCE FROM SPANISH FAMILIES.
PSYCHOMETRIC PROPERTIES OF THE SPANISH- LANGUAGE CHILD DEPRESSION INVENTORY WITH HISPANIC CHILDREN WHO ARE SECONDARY VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
MIGRATION AND SELF-ESTEEM: A QUALITATIVE STUDY AMONG INTERNAL MIGRANT GIRLS IN TURKEY.
GENDER INTERACTION IN COED PHYSICAL EDUCATION: A STUDY IN TURKEY.
SELF-ESTEEM AND HEALTH-RISK BEHAVIORS AMONG TURKISH LATE ADOLESCENTS.
USING INSTANT MESSAGING TO ENHANCE THE INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS OF TAIWANESE ADOLESCENTS: EVIDENCE FROM QUANTILE REGRESSION ANALYSIS.
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST TEENAGERS IN THE MALL ENVIRONMENT: A CASE FROM ANKARA, TURKEY.
TRAUMA, PROTECTION, AND DISTRESS IN LATE ADOLESCENCE: A MULTI-DETERMINANT APPROACH.
BREAKUP DISTRESS IN UNIVERSITY STUDENTS.
PARENTING PRACTICES AND SCHOOL DROPOUT: A LONGITUDINAL STUDY.
HOW ADOLESCENT EMPATHY AND PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR CHANGE IN THE CONTEXT OF SCHOOL CULTURE: A TWO-YEAR LONGITUDINAL STUDY.
THE ROLE OF SEX, SELF-PERCEPTION, AND SCHOOL BONDING IN PREDICTING ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT AMONG MIDDLE CLASS AFRICAN AMERICAN EARLY ADOLESCENTS.
INTERNET USE AND ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT: GENDER DIFFERENCES IN EARLY ADOLESCENCE.
PROCESS EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT P.A.T.H.S. (SECONDARY 2 PROGRAM): FINDINGS BASED ON THE CO-WALKER SCHEME.
RELIABILITY, VALIDITY, AND INVESTIGATION OF THE INDEX OF LEARNING STYLES IN A CHINESE LANGUAGE VERSION FOR LATE ADOLESCENTS OF TAIWANESE.
SUICIDE IDEATION AND DEPRESSION: THE MODERATION EFFECTS OF FAMILY COHESION AND SOCIAL SELF-CONCEPT.
EGO IDENTITY AND PERCEIVED FAMILY FUNCTIONING: COMPARING AT-RISK NATIVE-BORN AND IMMIGRANT ETHIOPIAN ADOLESCENTS IN ISRAEL.
AFTER-SCHOOL TIME USE IN TAIWAN: EFFECTS ON EDUCATION ACHIEVEMENT AND WELL-BEING.
LONGITUDINAL EFFECTS OF EDUCATIONAL EXPECTATIONS AND ACHIEVEMENT ATTRIBUTIONS ON ADOLESCENTS' ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENTS.
SOURCES OF STRESS FOR STUDENTS IN HIGH SCHOOL COLLEGE PREPARATORY AND GENERAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS: GROUP DIFFERENCES AND ASSOCIATIONS WITH ADJUSTMENT.
Aesthetic of the Entrepreneur: Afro-Cosmopolitan Rap and Moral Circulation in Accra, Ghana.
The Death of a Virgin: The Cult of Wang Yulan and Nationalism in Jinmen, Taiwan.
Destiny Effects: Militarization, State Power, and Punitive Containment in Kashmir Valley.
Reproductive Encounters: Negev Bedouin Women's Lay Encounters at Childbirth in an Israeli Hospital.
The Beggar's Play: Poverty, Coercion, and Performance in Shenyang, China.
African "Soul Brothers" in the 'Hood: Immigration, Islam, and the Black Encounter.
Introduction.
The Blood-Stained Text in Translation: Tattooing, Bodily Writing, and Performance of Chinese Virtue.
Reflecting on Words and Letters from the Perspective of Embodiment, with Commentary on Essays by Daphne Lei, Susan Phillips, and Sohini Ray.
Islam, Fatalism, and Medical Intervention: Lessons from Egypt on the Cultivation of Forbearance (Sabr) and Reliance on God (Tawakkul).
Malaysian Modernities: Cultural Politics and the Construction of Muslim Technoscientific Identities.
The Iranian Scientific Community and its Diaspora after the Islamic Revolution.
Evicted from Eternity: The Restructuring of Modern Rome/"Monti Moments: Men's Memories in the Heart of Rome".
Who were the Anasazi?
Temple of the Storm God.
Korea's Iron Man.
Apocalypse Soon?
Expedition: Grand Canyon.
The Subatomic Dig.
The Gold of Kush.
The Veleia Affair.
America's First Pastime.
Oceans of Dharma.
A New Home for Treasures of the Acropolis.
The Man Under the Jaguar Mountain.
Dark History of the White Death.
Mystery of the Log Coffin Culture.
Maya Roots.
Digging the Age of Aquarius.
The Waters of Petra.
SPAIN'S APPALACHIAN OUTPOST.
China's DNA Debate.
Under the Western Front.
Return to the Great Pyramid.
Archaeology of the Homeless.
Saving the Moai.
WORLD ROUNDUP.
WORLD ROUNDUP.
Amending the Meridian.
Witness to Genocide.
Extreme Makeover.
Swept Away.
Utopia Derailed.
Family Secrets.
Owning Alexander.
WORLD ROUNDUP.
Finding Treasure and Losing History.
The Realities of Reburial.
Trash Talk.
Map Quest.
Grave of the Middle East's Oldest Witch.
A Mummy's Life.
The Case of the Missing Buffalo Soldier.
Drugs, Guns, and Dirt.
Arise Atlantis!
WORLD ROUNDUP.
Forging Ahead.
The Past in High-Def.
Of Obelisks and Empire.
Antiquities Under Fire.
Rituals of the Nasca Lines.
Entombed in Style.
Mystery in Bermuda.
Saving the Silver City.
WORLD ROUNDUP.
Maya Roots.
Return to the Great Pyramid.
Digging the Age of Aquarius.
INTRODUCTION TO THE SPECIAL ISSUE.
REFLECTIONS ON THE EARLY HISTORY OF NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON DRUG ABUSE (NIDA): IMPLICATIONS FOR TODAY.
INSTITUTIONALIZATION OF DRUG ABUSE RESEARCH IN ACADEMIA: ONE PROFESSOR'S VIEW.
REFLECTIONS OF AN ACADEMIC CLINICAL RESEARCHER ON THE PAST 40 YEARS OF ADDICTION DEVELOPMENT.
REFLECTIONS ON THE MEANING OF DRUG EPIDEMICS.
REFLECTIONS ON 40 YEARS OF DRUG ABUSE RESEARCH: CHANGES IN THE EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DRUG ABUSE.
REFLECTIONS ON 40 YEARS OF ETHNOGRAPHIC DRUG ABUSE RESEARCH: IMPLICATIONS FOR THE FUTURE.
REFLECTIONS ON DRUG POLICY.
CRIMINALITY AND ADDICTION: SELECTED ISSUES FOR FUTURE POLICIES, PRACTICE, & RESEARCH.
BLACK BEAUTIES, GORILLA PILLS, FOOTBALLS, AND HILLBILLY HEROIN: SOME REFLECTIONS ON PRESCRIPTION DRUG ABUSE AND DIVERSION RESEARCH OVER THE PAST 40 YEARS.
THE NEUROBIOLOGY OF ADDICTION: WHERE WE HAVE BEEN AND WHERE WE ARE GOING.
REFLECTIONS ON THE PAST 40 YEARS OF BEHAVIORAL PHARMACOLOGY RESEARCH ON PROBLEMS OF DRUG ABUSE.
TREATMENT RESEARCH: ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND CHALLENGES.
THE THERAPEUTIC COMMUNITY FOR ADDICTIONS: AN EVOLVING KNOWLEDGE BASE.
REFLECTIONS ON 40 YEARS OF DRUG ABUSE PREVENTION RESEARCH.
HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH FOR DRUG AND ALCOHOL TREATMENT AND PREVENTION.
A TYPOLOGY OF DRUG-RELATED OFFENDING AMONG YOUNG HOMELESS INJECTION DRUG USERS.
DRUG ABUSING WOMEN IN THE COMMUNITY: THE IMPACT OF DRUG COURT INVOLVEMENT ON RECIDIVISM.
PEER-DRIVEN INTERVENTIONS IN VIETNAM AND CHINA TO PREVENT HIV: A PILOT STUDY TARGETING INJECTION DRUG USERS.
SUBSTANCE USE AND SOCIAL STABILITY AMONG AT-RISK HIV-INFECTED PERSONS.
THE DECONSTRUCTION OF A DRUG CRISIS: MEDIA COVERAGE OF DRUG ISSUES DURING THE 1996 PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN.
PREVALENCE AND CORRELATES OF HEPATITIS C AMONG INJECTION DRUG USERS: THE SIGNIFICANCE OF DURATION OF USE, INCARCERATION, AND RACE/ETHNICITY.
SOCIAL ESTRANGEMENT: FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH ALCOHOL OR DRUG DEPENDENCY AMONG HOMELESS, STREET-INVOLVED YOUNG ADULTS.
CONFIRMATORY FACTOR ANALYSIS AND TEST-RETEST RELIABILITY OF THE ALCOHOL AND DRUG CONFRONTATION SCALE (ADCS).
NONSOCIAL REINFORCEMENT OF THE NONMEDICAL USE OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: A PARTIAL TEST OF SOCIAL LEARNING AND SELF-CONTROL THEORIES.
TORONTO DRUG TREATMENT COURT: PARTICIPANT INTAKE CHARACTERISTICS AS PREDICTORS OF "SUCCESSFUL" PROGRAM COMPLETION.
MEDICAL CONDITIONS OF HAZARDOUS DRINKERS AND DRUG USERS IN PRIMARY CARE CLINICS IN CAPE TOWN, SOUTH AFRICA.
CREATIVE-CITY SCRIPTS, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, AND SUSTAINABILITY.
MAKING SUSTAINABLE CREATIVE/CULTURAL SPACE IN SHANGHAI AND SINGAPORE.
CREATIVE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, SUSTAINABILITY, AND EXCLUSION IN RURAL AREAS.
URBANIZATION IN BHUTAN.
DAMASCUS: A GEOGRAPHICAL FIELD NOTE.
INVENTING THE "MAGIC VALLEY" OF SOUTH TEXAS, 1905-1941.
METEOROLOGICAL TSUNAMIS IN SOUTHERN BRITAIN: AN HISTORICAL REVIEW.
RICE PRODUCER-PROCESSOR NETWORKS IN CÔTE DTVOIRE.
REJECTING VIOLENCE ON THE LANDSCAPE IN LAWRENCE, KANSAS.
VOODOO, ZOMBIES, AND MERMAIDS: U.S. NEWSPAPER COVERAGE OF HAITI.
From Hospital to Nursing Facility: Factors Influencing Decisions.
Education: A Complex and Empowering Social Work Intervention at the End of Life.
The Influence of Community-Based Services on the Burden of Spouses Caring for Their Partners with Dementia.
Roles, Responsibilities, and Relationships among Older Husbands Caring for Wives with Progressive Dementia and Other Chronic Conditions.
The Changing Face of Opioid Addiction: Prescription Pain Pill Dependence and Treatment.
Building Capacity for Evidence We Can Believe In: The Argument for Social Change as an Evidence-Based Practice Agenda.
Posttraumatic Stress and Growth: The Contribution of Cognitive Appraisal and Sense of Belonging to the Country.
The Many Layers of Social Support: Capturing the Voices of Young People with Spina Bifida and Their Parents.
Illness of the Mind or Illness of the Spirit? Mental Health-Related Conceptualization and Practices of Older Iranian Immigrants.
The Influence of Religiosity on Depression among Low-Income People with Diabetes.
Eradicating Perinatal HIV Transmission Is Possible: A Model for Social Work Practitioners.
Mounting a Social Work Response to the Worsening HIV Epidemic in Black Communities.
Practice Behaviors of Youth Soccer Players.
Effects of Classwide Peer Tutoring on the Performance of Sixth Grade Students During a Volleyball Unit.
Plyo Play: A Novel Program of Short Bouts of Moderate and High Intensity Exercise Improves Physical Fitness in Elementary School Children.
Body Image Concerns in College-Aged Male Physical Education Students: A Descriptive Inquiry.
Feature Articles on African Americans in Sports Illustrated in the 1990s.
Motivational Factors for Participating in Basic Instruction Programs.
An Examination of "Wash-out" and Workplace Conditions of Beginning Physical Education Teachers.
Enacting the Spiritual Dimension in Physical Education.
Energy Expenditure of Sport Stacking.
Physical Education in Urban High School Class Settings: Features and Correlations between Teaching Behaviors and Learning Activities.
Intentional Development: A Model to Guide Lifelong Physical Activity.
Secondary Students' Perceptions of Enjoyment in Physical Education: An American and English Perspective.
Elementary Classroom Teachers Attitudes and Perspectives of Elementary Physical Education.
Relations Among Beliefs About Epistemology, Ability Conceptions, and Achievement in High School Physical Education Students.
Coaches' Perspectives of Eighth-Grade Athletes Playing High School Varsity Sports.
Integrated Health and Physical Education Program to Reduce Media Use and Increase Physical Activity in Youth.
New Practice Model for Latinos in Need of Social Work Services.
Consumer-Driven Health Care: Answer to Global Competition or Threat to Social Justice?
The Big Picture: How Social Work Can Effectively Utilize Photographs.
Civilian Social Work: Serving the Military and Veteran Populations.
Treating Female Perpetrators: State Standards for Batterer Intervention Services.
Results from a National Study of Social Workers Sanctioned by State Licensing Boards.
Child Welfare Worker Caseload: What's Just Right?
What African American Male Adolescents Are Telling Us about HIV Infection among Their Peers: Cultural Approaches for HIV Prevention.
Moving from Colonization toward Balance and Harmony: A Native American Perspective on Wellness.
Fundamental Contradictions in Cultural Competence.
Mexican American Women's Adherence to Hemodialysis Treatment: A Social Constructivist Perspective.
Advancing the Africentric Paradigm Shift Discourse: Building toward Evidence-Based Africentric Interventions in Social Work Practice with African Americans.
Adversity and Resiliency in the Lives of Native Hawaiian Elders.
A Black Experience-Based Approach to Gender-Based Violence.
Somatic Experiencing Treatment with Social Service Workers Following Hurricanes Katrina and Rita.
Development of a Risk and Resilience-Based Out-of-School Time Program for Children and Youths.
The Temperance Movement and Social Work.
Brief Solution-Focused Counseling: A Practical Effective Strategy for Dealing with Wait Lists in Community-Based Mental Health Services.
Doctoral Education in Social Work: What We Know and What We Need to Know.
Restorative Justice as Social Justice for Victims of Gendered Violence: A Standpoint Feminist Perspective.
Older Adult Inmates: The Challenge for Social Work.
Social Workers' and Service Users' Causal Attributions for Poverty.
Risk and Protective Factors for HIV/AIDS in Native Americans: Implications for Preventive Intervention.
Innovative Service or Proselytizing: Exploring When Services Delivery Becomes a Platform for Unwanted Religious Persuasion.
Social Work Practice with Latinos: Key Issues for Social Workers.
What African American Male Adolescents Are Telling Us about HIV Infection among Their Peers: Cultural Approaches for HIV Prevention.
Parents Behaving Badly? The Relationship between the Sportsmanship Behaviors of Adults and Athletes in Youth Basketball Games.
The Sports Inventory for Pain: Empirical and Confirmatory Factorial Validity.
Sources of Acute Stress Among Chinese College Athletes as a Function of Gender and Skill Level.
Achievement Goals, Thoughts about Intense Physical Activity, and Exerted Effort: A Mediational Analysis.
Sport-Related Identities and the "Toxic Jock.".
Testing the Team Identification-Social Psychological Health Model: Examining Non-marquee Sports, Seasonal Differences, and Multiple Teams.
Self-Monitoring and Selected Measures of Aerobic and Strength Fitness and Short-term Exercise Attendence.
A Test of the Trans-Contextual Model of Motivation in Greek High School Pupils.
Gender Effects in the Assessment of Technical Fouls Among High School Basketball Officials and Collegiate Proxies.
Using Motor Imagery to Learn Tactical Movements in Basketball.
The Influence of Gender-role Socialization, Media Use and Sports Participation on Perceptions of Gender-Appropriate Sports.
Reconceptualizing Indicants of Sport Perfectionism as a Function of Gender.
Coaching Knowledge and Success: Going Beyond Athletic Experiences.
Spawning Sliding Success: Evaluating a Stress Management and Cohesion Development Program for Young Lugers.
College Students' Perceptions of Athletes Who Cheat: The Role of Performance and History.
Multivariate Analysis of Program Goals, Leadership Style, and Occupational Burnout Among Intercollegiate Sport Coaches.
Sport Team Identification and Belief in Team Curses: The Case of the Boston Red Sox and the Curse of the Bambino.
Examining the Mediating Role of Strategy Use on Students' Motivation and Persistence/Effort in Physical Education.
Talented Male Athletes: Exemplary Character or Questionable Characters?
An Examination of Sport Commitment of Windsurfers.
Disappointment Theory and Disappointment Among Baseball Fans.
Post-Exercise Affective Responses in Sedentary African American Females.
The Relationships Between Motivational Climate, Goal Orientations, Anxiety, and Self-Confidence Among Swimmers.
The Impact of Electronic Mobility Devices for Persons Who Are Visually Impaired: A Systematic Review of Effects and Effectiveness.
Stereotyped Movements Among Children Who Are Visually Impaired.
A Survey of Daily Trips of Persons Who Are Visually Impaired Living in Communities in Japan.
Reading Media Used by Higher-Education Students and Graduates with Visual Impairments in Greece.
A History of Instructional Methods in Uncontracted and Contracted Braille.
The Effect of Consistent Structured Reading Instruction on High and Low Literacy Achievement in Young Children Who Are Blind.
Acquisition of Literacy Skills by Young Children Who Are Blind: Results from the ABC Braille Study.
Participation of Parents in the Early Exploration of Tactile Graphics by Children Who Are Visually Impaired.
Hand Movements and Braille Reading Efficiency: Data from the Alphabetic Braille and Contracted Braille Study.
An Investigation of the Height of Embossed Braille Dots for Labels on Pharmaceutical Products.
An Investigation of Spelling in the Written Compositions of Students Who Read Braille.
Social Experiences of Beginning Braille Readers in Literacy Activities: Qualitative and Quantitative Findings of the ABC Braille Study.
Parents' Perceptions of Professional Support for the Emergent Literacy of Young Children with Visual Impairments.
The Role of Hand Dominance in Beginning Braille Readers.
Innovative Solutions for Words with Emphasis: Alternative Methods of Braille Transcription.
The Quality of Brailled Instructional Materials Produced in Texas Public Schools.
Drop-off Detection with the Long Cane: Effects of Different Cane Techniques on Performance.
Home Environments and Perceived Needs of Anglo and Latino Families of Young Children with Visual Impairments.
Louis Braille Celebration.
Physical Activity, Body Composition, and Perceived Quality of Life of Adults with Visual Impairments.
Teaching Adults to Read Braille Using Phonological Methods: Single-Case Studies.
Aligning State Standards and the Expanded Core Curriculum: Balancing the Impact of the No Child Left Behind Act.
Personnel preparation.
Calendar.
The Case of the Reluctant Reader: Insights from Three Professionals.
CREATING AN ENVIRONMENT FOR SUCCESS.
MOTIVATION THROUGH PREFERRED ACTIVITIES.
Louis Braille Celebration.
Experiences of Parents with Visual Impairments Who Are Raising Children.
Characteristics of Individuals with Congenital and Acquired Deaf-Blindness.
Expanded Core Curriculum: 12 Years Later.
Policy Analysis of Science-based Best Practices for Students with Visual Impairments.
The Functional Classification of Brain Damage--Related Vision Loss.
Supporting Students' Literacy Through Data-Driven Decision-Making and Ongoing Assessment of Achievement.
Family Functioning and Low Vision: A Systematic Review.
Evaluating Training and Implementation of the Individualized Meaning-Centered Approach to Teaching Braille Literacy.
The Impact of War and Economic Sanction on the Incidence of Retinopathy of Prematurity in Serbia.
Teaching Jump Rope to Children with Visual Impairments.
Demographics of Vision Loss in the United States: Dealing with Definitions.
People.
A Parent's Perspective on the Importance of Braille for Success in Life.
Design of a Map and Bus Guide to Teach Transferable Public Transit Skills.
American Indian Studies: Intellectual Naval Gazing or Academic Discipline?
Contemporary American Indian Studies.
From Berries to Orchards: Tracing the History of Berrying and Economic Transformation among Lake Superior Ojibwe.
Lost and Lonesome: Literary Reflections on Museums and the Roles of Relics.
Memories of the Alabama Creek War, 1813--1814 U.S.: Governmental and Native Identities at the Horseshoe Bend National Military Park.
Cultures in Collision: Cosmology, Jurisprudence, and Religion in Tlingit Territory.
An Anishinaabe Tribalography.
The Contemporary Reality of Canadian Imperialism.
Wait a Second. Who Are You Anyways?: The Insider/Outsider Debate and American Indian Studies.
Haudenosaunee Genealogies: Conflict and Community in the Oneida Land Claim.
Conducting Haudenosaunee Historical Research from Home: In the Shadow of the Six Nations—Caledonia Reclamation.
Telling Our Own Stories: Lumbee History and the Federal Acknowledgment Process.
Indigenous Labor and Indigenous History.
Commentary on "Working from Home in American Indian History."
A Giant Awakens Brazil.
AN EXPORT POWERHOUSE EMERGES.
Beyond Iraq: A New U.S. Strategy for the Middle East.
Change They Can Believe In: To Make Israel Safe, Give Palestinians Their Due.
CONVERGENCE DIVIDENDS: BUSINESS LEADERS DRIVE NATION'S GLOBAL AMBITIONS.
PREPARING FOR THE NEXT GENERATION: ICT SET TO BECOME A MAJOR DRIVER OF THE TURKISH ECONOMY.
'BOOM AND BUST' NO MORE: LEARNING FROM THE PAST,TURKEY'S REFORMED FINANCIAL MARKETS MAY PROVE RESILIENT IN TIMES OF CRISIS.
THE GREAT TURKISH ENERGY RACE.
REVITALIZING THE GRANDEUR OF ISTANBUL.
The Myth of the Autocratic Revival: Why Liberal Democracy Will Prevail.
America's Edge: Power in the Networked Century.
In the Shadow of the Oval Office: The Next National Security Adviser.
The Responsibility to Contain: Protecting Sovereignty Under International Law.
Where Are the Civilians? How to Rebuild the U.S. Foreign Service.
A Broader Agenda: Beyond Bush-Era Foreign Policy.
How Development Leads to Democracy.
The Geoengineering Option.
An Agenda for NATO.
The Default Power.
Low and Behold.
The Dollar Dilemma.
The Death of Dayton.
Without Conditions.
Copenhagen's Inconvenient Truth.
The Other Climate Changers.
The Low-Carbon Diet.
Globalization in Retreat.
Tamed Tigers, Distressed Dragon.
The Pentagon's Wasting Assets.
Flipping the Taliban.
Tehran's Take.
The Real War in Mexico.
The Russia File.
Pirates, Then and Now.
Charles Augustus Lafayette Lamar and the Movement to Reopen the African Slave Trade.
New Ideas from New Sources: Modern Research in Reconstruction, 1865-1876.
A Misguided Mistake: The Trustees' Public Garden in Savannah, Georgia.
As Gold Is Tried In The Fire, So Hearts Must Be Tried By Pain: The Temperance Movement in Georgia and the Local Option Law of 1885.
The Origins of the Georgia Judiciary.
Notes and Documents.
RECENTLY PROCESSED MANUSCRIPT COLLECTIONS & CATALOGED MATERIAL AT THE GEORGIA HISTORICAL SOCIETY.
Slave Women, Capital Crime, and Criminal Justice in Georgia.
Liberty Shipyards: The Role of Savannah and Brunswick in the Allied Victory, 1941-1945.
Georgia's Influence on the U.S. Senate: A Reassessment of the Rejection of Benjamin Fishbourn and the Origin of Senatorial Courtesy.
Other Books Received.
RECENTLY PROCESSED MANUSCRIPT COLLECTIONS & CATALOGED MATERIAL AT THE GEORGIA HISTORICAL SOCIETY.
Jemaah Islamiyah Adopts the Hezbollah Model.
Nasrallah's Defeat in the 2006 War.
Does Israel Need Think Tanks?
Islamists Approach Europe.
Fethullah Gülen's Grand Ambition.
Muslim Strategies to Convert Western Christians.
Europe's Shifting Immigration Dynamic.
Turkey at the Energy Crossroads.
Will Untapped Ottoman Archives Reshape the Armenian Debate?
Pakistan and Iran's Dysfunctional Relationship.
The Politics of Palestinian Demography.
Are Honor Killings Simply Domestic Violence?
Are Judaism and Christianity as Violent as Islam?
Is U.S. Detention Policy in Iraq Working?
Contemporary Ethiopian Painting in Traditional Style.
Icons of Devotion/Icons of Trade.
Contemporary Women Artists in Ethiopia.
Christian Chromolithographs in Ethiopia.
Oromo Fashion.
Yoruba Heritage as Project.
Shining Lights: Self-fashioning in the Lantern Festival of Saint Louis, Senegal.
Intangible Cultural Property, Semiotic Ideology, and the Vagaries of Ethnoculinary Recognition.
Transforming the Orixás.
Objects on the Edge.
Framing the Ephemeral.
The Power of Ephemera.
The Dripping Man.
Coming Together and Falling Apart.
A Conservation Conundrum.
Backward Glances.
Changing Old Institutions: Race in the Mark Twain Museum.
The Amistad Research Center Tulane University, New Orleans, LA by Andrew Salinas & Brenda Square.
Encyclopedia of Arkansas History & Culture.
The BB Gun.
Making Biscuits in the Morning: The Evangelical Sounds and Ambiguous Furies of Confederate War Memorials.
Delta Sources and Resources: Matilda and Karl Pfeiffer Museum and Study Center.
An Agricultural Economist's Perspective on the Mississippi Delta.
The House that Cotton Built: Recovering African American History at Lakeport Plantation.
From Cotton Boll to Rock 'n' Roll: A Brief Account of the Boll Weevil as Musical.
Fields, Flooding, and Fuming: Public Opinion about Mosquito Control in Craighead County, Arkansas.
Southern Tenant Farmers Museum.
The 35-Year War on the CIA.
The Missile -- Defense Betrayal.
We're Number Two?
The Illegal-Settlements Myth.
Dictatorships and Double Standards Redux.
Higher Immigration, Lower Crime.
Writer on the Wild Side.
How We Can Win in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan and the Liberal Collapse.
What Price Popularity?
Toddlin' Town.
Intel and the Israelis.
Satchmo and the Jews.
From Hungary.
Will the World Buy Israel's New 'Brand'?
The Labor, Movement's Dangerous Wish List.
The Petroleum-Tax Giveback.
How Politics Destroyed a Great TV Show.
The Shul at Loon Lake.
Nathan at the Speed of Light.
The Greater of Two Loessers.
The Art of Obama Worship.
The Path to Republican Revival.
The Old and the New: An Introduction to Georges Perec.
Statement of Intent.
The Machine.
A SOLID INVESTMENT FOR TIGHT TIMES.
SAMPLINGS.
Curricular Pillars in the Elementary General Music Classroom.
Stepping Aside: Teaching in a Student-Centered Music Classroom.
Preparing the Conductor as Teacher.
Minority Students and Faculty in Higher Music Education.
Choral Warm-Ups for Changing Adolescent Voices.
More than just Minutes: Using Practice Charts as Tools for Learning.
Teaching World Music through Feature Films.
Intentions and Perceptions: In Search of Alignment.
Educational Applications of Podcasting in the Music Classroom.
Six Key Principles for Music Assessment.
The Invisible Student: Understanding Social Identity Construction within Performing Ensembles.
Enhancing Middle-Level General Music: Suggestions from the Literature.
Singing and Moving: Teaching Strategies for Audiation in Children.
Constructivist Practices to Increase Student Engagement in the Orchestra Classroom.
Michigan State Adjudicated Choral Festivals: Revising the Adjudication Process.
Engaging and Educating Students with Culturally Responsive Performing Ensembles.
Growing a New Generation of Music Teachers.
Sexual Orientation and Music Education: Continuing a Tradition.
Capturing Student Progress via Portfolios in the Music Classroom.
Saving the Spiritual for Your Students.
Engaging Community Resources for Experiencing Brazilian Music.
Virtual Field Experiences for Real Music Classrooms.
Reflections on Career Development and Eclecticism in Music Education.
Collaboration with Music: A Noteworthy Endeavor.
Strategies for Working with Children with Cochlear Implants.
Teaching Music to Children with Autism : Understandings and Perspectives.
Music in a Flat World: Thomas L Friedman's Ideas and Your Program.
Lift the Hood and Get Dirty!
Looking to Music Education's Future.
MENC's Response to the 2008 NAEP and Recommendations for Future NAEP in Music.
Vermin: A Notebook.
The Moral and the Aesthetic, Recently.
What Man Has Made of Man.
From a Notebook that Never Was.
As If Nature Talked Back To Me: A Notebook.
The Necessary Minimum.
Sing, God-awful Muse!
Heaven's Commonplace: Hoc Opus, Hic Labor Est.
Jerusalem.
Poetry, Daily.
Show Me a Howe.
Marin County, Sort Of.
Aye Birds Tune.
The Chisel.
Miss Bishop Says So.
You're Not the Outlaw You Think You Are.
On a Second Reading.
Manifesto-ness: An Introduction.
Manifest Aversions, Conceptual Conundrums, & Implausibly Deniable Links.
From "Deaf Republic".
INGER CHRISTENSEN.
Thorn Gunn's New Jerusalem.
Marginality and Manifesto: A Response.
FROM INVOLUNTARY OBJECT TO VOLUNTARY SPY: FEMALE AGENCY, NOVELS, AND THE MARKETPLACE IN NORTHANGER ABBEY.
Narrative Threads of Madness.
Attributions of Madness in Ian McEwan's Enduring Love.
Acting Figuratively, Telling Tropically. Figures of Insanity in Günter Grass's Die Blechtrommel.
Madness in Sartre's "The Room.".
Dancing to Ollie's Tunes: The Rhetoric of Narrative Stutter.
Fight Club and the Embedding of Delirium in Narrative.
De(ar)ranged Minds, Mindless Acts and Polemical Portrayal in Kleist and Canetti.
Capturing Capgras: The Echo Maker by Richard Powers.
Echos, Doubles, and Delusions: Capgras Syndrome in Science and Literature.
Do you want this world left on?: Global Imaginaries in the Films of Michael Winterbottom.
Child of the Long Take: Alfonso Cuaron's Film Aesthetics in the Shadow of Globalization.
Globalization and Cultural Identity in the Films of Ang Lee.
Kung Fu Production for Global Consumption: The Depoliticization of Kung Fu in Stephen Chow's Kung Fu Hustle.
Beyond Reconciliation: Filial Relationship as a Lifelong Developmental Theme in Bergman's Films.
Theatre Reviewing: Performance versus Criticism.
My writing mantra: Total risk, freedom, discipline.
Write a poem in THREE PHASES.
Moats, stars & ducks: My year in a castle.
5 ARTICLES I wish I'd WRITTEN.
Is a writers group RIGHT FOR YOU?
How to obtain sharp, USEFUL CRITIQUES.
A 'lone wolf' MEETS THE PACK.
Get the most OUT OF YOUR MFA PROGRAM.
How to succeed in business writing.
Writing for airline magazines.
The reason behind the rhyme.
Inside advice from TOP AGENTS.
Knowing when to quit.
Deepen your stories today.
How a skiing book found its groove.
A fresh approach to YA novels.
A family-history voyage.
Traditional formula was too simple.
Web markets come of age.
Dive into a new experience.
Forget the rules and make the leap.
BREATHE LIFE into YOUR characters.
Let your dialogue SPEAK FOR ITSELF.
Fact-checking 101.
MIND-MAP your way to an idea.
CONSTRUCT an engaging article.
TIPS on pitching and marketing.
Avoid a weak link in screenplays.
An occupational hazard: PHONE ANXIETY.
How a short story became a novel.
The best clients--and the worst.
Tune up your service articles.
Economy dampens publishing.
A pantoum playfully links stanzas.
5 WAYS TO BREAK writer's block.
How to write a successful thriller.
Tap into a writers ORGANIZATION.
Tips on FINDING the right writers conference.
How to CHOOSE an online writing course.
LOW-COST ways to improve your writing.
Get the MOST from a writing course.
Apply a book doctor's eye to your own FICTION.
Power your story with a sense of place.
What's your perspective? Sometimes it pays to turn your creative writing upside down and inside out, and let your work rediscover itself.
Murder in tartan plaid.
Advice from first-time novelists: Our 5 panelists offer a wealth of insights on where ideas come from and how they're developed, and their rewarding experiences with the editing process.
The 10 most common story problems: If your short story keeps getting rejected, use this checklist to spot—and fix—these beginner's mistakes.
Is a university press right for you?: An author compares its approach to that of the big commercial houses and finds some advantages worth considering
Writing for readers 50 and older: How to break into magazines that target retirees and those looking toward retirement.
Set the narrative hook: How to write novel openings that will reel in readers.
From idea to contract: The author of 13 nonfiction books offers a 10-step method to get you there.
7 key principles for writing success: A novelist and freelance writer shares what it takes to maintain a career for 25 years.
Freelancing through tough times: 9 writers offer some timely tips for surviving a weak economy—and even thriving.
When and how to connect with editors on social-media sites.
A case for plot.
Dare you and another poet collaborate?
10 habits of a SUCCESSFUL WRITER.
NEW-WORD Web sites = story ideas.
Through a child's eyes.
Manage the writing/parenting challenge.
Give them something to talk about.
When you yearn to smash your computer.
Gear up with writing goals.
The spirit of Christian fiction today.
Where inner and outer meet: For this writer, the natural world acts as a guide deep into the heart of human experience.
Telling a real story: How to find, sell, research and write true-life articles.
A feeling for where you are: A writer and teacher offers 5 exercises to develop your understanding of place.
See with fresh eyes: For writers, digging deep to find the soul of a place can inspire and unlock a 'bounty' of memory and material.
The art of the critique: With these 5 tips for giving valuable feedback, you'll stay in the good graces of your fellow MFA students or writing-group members.
8 common copywriting challenges: Here's what to do when your client and you are not on the same page.
Homage to my mento: How a novice writer's relationship with an experienced writer blossomed into friendship.
23 writing prompts to get you on a roll: These techniques—from free-writing to composing a 'bad' poem—will boost creativity.
13 Maxims for Novelists: A bestselling author offers words of wisdom on everything from committing to your craft to evaluating criticism.
The (not so) creative process: Why the slow, uninspired slog is essential, and can even produce inspired writing.
Patterns of behavior: A novelist and family specialist shows you how to put temperament research to work in your fiction.
What makes me stop reading a mystery: An award-winning reviewer and author steeped in the genre has some issues she'd like to discuss.
Making readers cry: On the value of developing a writer's thin skin that absorbs beauty and pain.
'True' stories, and necessary lies: A memoir writer reflects on the inescapable distortions of memory in describing one's past.
Contracts 101: What you need to know: Don't just sign on the dotted line. This guide will help you negotiate the best terms.
Outdoor rec markets seek active writers: Here are 6 ways to break into magazines for hikers, bikers and other open-air enthusiasts.
Writing children's books: An author of classics reflects on what it takes to succeed in this genre: giving young, readers what they want.
Find the essence through historical research: The process, says an award-winning writer of fiction and poetry, is akin to extracting the valuable oil from flower petals.
11 rules for writing short science fiction: A veteran of the genre tells you what you need to know about crafting and selling stories for an audience 'looking to get amazed.'
A joint venture may be the ticket: Partnering up with an expert could be your path to nonfiction publication.
The motion of a notion: How I sold my nonfiction book idea with a successful book proposal.
9 keys to writing copy that sells: Make your corporate clients happy with promotions that get results.
How to weather the literary climate: Our author lays out the challenges—and rewards—of writing books today.
Off Track.
Lighting a Path.
Double-Edged Rules.
A Debt-Defying Act.
How Did They Get It So Wrong?
Persuasive Direct.
What a Legal Recession Looks Like.
WHAT I DID DURING THE MELTDOWN.
How Lawyers Enabled: THE MELTDOWN.
Recession-Proof Your PRACTICE.
Situations Wanted.
You're History. NOW WHAT?
Justice Systems Sent Reeling.
Pooling PRACTICES.
Beyond Reach.
THE CLOSER.
Any lawyer who tells you he's never lost a case hasn't really tried that many, cases..
If you are not emotionally involved, your client is not getting, your best effort..
Just damn luck. That's all it has been..
Most trials are not sprints, but are marathons..
If you can railroad a bad man to prison, you can railroad a good man..
Nothing compares to the electricity an actual trial, and it is magnified when it is a jury trial..
I would have won them [all], if my clients hadn't kept: reloading their gun and firing..
Tongue Ties.
Who's Policing the Fourth Amendment?
Persuasive Cross-Examination.
MUCH CHATTER ABOUT TWITTER.
FMLA GETS A FACELIFT.
GOING SOLO ON A BUDGET.
EDITORS' FOREWORD.
OBAMA AND AFRICA: MATCHING EXPECTATIONS WITH REALITY.
U.S. FOREIGN ASSISTANCE TO AFRICA: SECURING AMERICA'S INVESTMENT FOR LASTING DEVELOPMENT.
AFRICA: THE UNITED STATES AND CHINA COURT THE CONTINENT.
MARITIME PIRACY IN EAST AFRICA.
AFRICAN SOLUTIONS TO AN INTERNATIONAL PROBLEM: ARMS CONTROL AND DISARMAMENT IN AFRICA.
THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT'S CASE AGAINST THE PRESIDENT OF SUDAN: A CRITICAL LOOK.
THE AFRICAN UNION: PITFALLS AND PROSPECTS FOR UNITING AFRICA.
GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP IN AFRICA: MEASURES, METHODS AND RESULTS.
POWER AND PRESSURE: AFRICAN MEDIA AND THE EXTRACTIVE SECTOR.
KENYA'S UNFINISHED AGENDAS.
THE GLASS FORTRESS: ZIMBABWE'S CYBER-GUERRILLA WARFARE.
EDITORS' FOREWORD.
PREFACE.
ACHIEVING EQUAL TREATMENT THROUGH THE BALLOT BOX.
AN INTERPRETIVIST JUDGE AND THE MEDIA.
TOOLS AGAINST TERROR: ALL OF THE ABOVE.
PUBLIC DISPLAYS OF AFFECTION…FOR GOD: RELIGIOUS MONUMENTS AFTER MCCREARY AND VAN ORDEN.
MANLINESS AND THE CONSTITUTION.
MARKETING PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS IN THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY: AN ANALYSIS OF THE CONTINUED VIABILITY OF TRADITIONAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW IN THE AGE OF DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER ADVERTISING.
Divorce was cue for mental health decline.
Helping people with mental health problems deal with money.
NEWS IN BRIEF.
A showcase of all talents.
A public dysfunction.
On the nature trail.
Time to lay down the law?
Home advantage.
Assessing dignity in care.
2009: The outlook is changeable.
Fostering success by therapy.
Short breaks for disabled children.
Universal truths.
Where to start with individual budgets?
NEWS IN BRIEF.
Creditable alternative to banks.
The Vanishing.
Homelessness prevention scheme is up to the mark.
Children's experiences of family relationships.
Remploy's bad timing.
How to work with people with dementia.
NEWS IN BRIEF.
Workforce skills are key to dementia care.
Degree needs a reality check.
Wanted: one gay care worker.
Learning the way to journey's end.
An evaluation of Hampshire's personalisation report.
CSCI identifies block in personalisation.
THE FORUM.
Up to the task.
Follow the leader.
A wild child who is shouting out for help.
Media training for young people who have been in care.
Dependence dilemmas.
We really want some answers.
Early warning systems.
The tune has changed.
Let's get this agenda up and running.
SENding a message on school funding.
Family-based support for early learning.
Scant justice.
Console yourselves.
Neighbours in need.
Meet the Neets.
How to work with young offenders.
Responses to child maltreatment.
Anorexic or simply old?
Alert to the danger signs.
NEWS IN BRIEF.
Enough is enough!
Fostering care.
latrogenic occipital osteomyelitis.
Laryngeal saccular cyst in an infant.
Nonseptic lateral sinus thrombosis: The role of the otolaryngologist.
Depressed anterior table fracture: A minimally invasive method of reduction.
Training in the primary prevention and early detection of oral cancer: Pilot study of its impact on clinicians' perceptions and intentions.
Endoscopic view of purulent sphenoid sinusitis.
Monaural diplacusis with tinnitus, aural fullness, hyperacusis, and sensorineural hearing loss.
Primary sinonasal malignant melanoma: A clinicopathologic and prognostic study.
Validation of a pediatric cough questionnaire.
Accomplishment and opportunity in geriatric otolaryngology.
Geriatric otolaryngology toolbox: What you and your nurse can do to improve outcomes for older adults.
Jugular fossa meningioma: Presentation and treatment options.
Intraoperative bupivacaine for reduction of post-tonsillectomy pain: A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study of 26 patients.
Complete round window niche occlusion for superior semicircular canal dehiscence syndrome: A minimally invasive approach.
Three spontaneous occurrences of nasal septal abscess in patients with chronic asymptomatic HIV-the need for early intervention and reconstruction.
Otolaryngologic symptoms in persons exposed to World Trade Center dust and particle pollutants: A case for caution in declaring a diagnosis of WTC syndrome.
Salivary gland myoepithelioma with focal capsular invasion.
Necrotizing otitis externa: A new trend? Report of 6 atypical cases.
Pediatric airway consultation survey in a tertiary care children's hospital: An interobserver analysis.
Epidemiologic study to explore links between Ménière syndrome and migraine headache.
External auditory canal cholesteatoma: A rare complication of tympanoplasty.
Granulocytic sarcoma of the nasal cavity: A case report.
Mylohyoid cysticercosis: A rare submandibular mass.
Osseous metaplasia of the maxillary sinus with formation of a well-developed haversian system and bone marrow.
Pediatric neurotology.
The nasal septum: An osteometric study of 16 cadaver specimens.
Palatal myoclonus secondary to hypertrophic olivary degeneration.
Dacryocystitis secondary to an iatrogenic foreign body in the lacrimal apparatus.
Clinical manifestations of sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma.
The postauricular island flap (flip-flop flap).
Eosinophilic esophagitis.
An asymptomatic schwannoma of the nasal septum: Report of a unique case.
First branchial cleft cyst (type II).
Endoscopic view of secretion transport from a maxillary antrostomy to the nasopharynx.
Synovial sarcoma of the cheek.
Posterior glottic web in a 6-year-old boy.
Fistulography: A useful imaging modality for identifying the exact location and extent of complete branchial fistulas.
Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease.
Fistula between the carotid artery and larynx in a 67-year-old man.
Laryngeal oncocytic cyst presenting with an acute onset of stridor.
The Halftime Show.
OF LICE AND LIBRARY: THE TALE OF AN E-MAIL.
Are We Really Saving Resources with Current Hiring Practices at Local Health Departments?
Investigation of Bacterial Pathogens on 70 Frequently Used Environmental Surfaces in a Large Urban U.S. University.
Potential Pathogens and Effective Disinfectants on Public Telephones at a Large Urban United States University.
Environmental Health in the 2009 State Legislative Sessions.
Special Listing.
Environmental Health Risks Associated with Off-Campus Student-Tenant Housing.
Practical Stuff!
Library Corner.
Seasonal Abundance of Vectors at Outdoor Environments in Endemic and Nonendemic Districts of Dengue in Kaohsiung, South Taiwan.
Molecular Epidemiological Characteristics of Shigella spp. Isolated from River Narmada During 2005-2006.
EH Update.
Geometry 101: The Equilateral Triangle.
Sacramento County's Retail Food Program Enhancements and its Food Safety Rating and Disclosure System--2008 Crumbine Award Winner.
Environmental Public Health Leadership Development.
The Public Health Approach to Chemical Exposures: A National Conversation.
Using Health Inspection Scores to Assess Risk in Food Services.
Community Engagement -- Overcoming Challenges.
Prevalence of Fragrance Sensitivity in the American Population.
Analysis of Foodborne Disease Outbreaks for Improvement of Food Safety Programs in Seoul. Republic of Korea, from 2002 to 2006.
Treatment of Septic Tank Effluents by a Full-Scale Capillary Seepage Soil Biofiltration System.
EH Update.
Library Corner.
LEAD IN ADULTS: THE LESSER CONCERN REARS ITS HEAD. (cover story)
Assessing Consumer Awareness About Mercury in Fish.
Predicting Saturated Hydraulic Conductivity from Percolation Test Results in Layered Silt Loam Soils.
Consumption of Groundwater as an Independent Risk Factor of Salmonella Choleraesuis Infection: A Case-Control Study in Taiwan.
A New Reality for Environmental Health.
Evaluation of Respiratory Symptoms and Their Possible Association with Residential Indoor Bioaerosol Concentrations and Other Environmental Influences. (cover story)
Recirculating Vertical Flow Constructed Wetland: Green Alternative to Treating Both Human and Animal Sewage.
Achieving Compliance with Environmental Health--Related Land Use Planning Conditions in Hong Kong: Perspectives from Traditional Motivation Theories.
Job Satisfaction and Issues Related to the Retention of Environmental Health Professionals in North Carolina. (cover story)
The Influence of Experience and Credential Status on Perceptions of Agency Competency in Delivery of the 10 Essential Environmental Public Health Services.
CAN FOOD SAFETY GO GREEN? A DISCUSSION IN THREE SCENES.
PACE IN FLORIDA: FOMENTING LEADERSHIP IN HARD TIMES.
Survey of the Home Sewage Disposal Systems in Northeast Ohio. (cover story)
University Students' Hand Hygiene Practice During a Gastrointestinal Outbreak in Residence: What They Say They Do and What They Actually Do.
RESPONDING OUT LOUD TO BUDGET DISASTER: THE CASE OF EL PASO COUNTY, COLORADO.
Predictability of Swimming Prohibitions by Observational Parameters: A Proactive Public Health Policy, Stamford, Connecticut, 1989-2004.
Mold Growth on Gypsum Wallboard--A Summary of Three Techniques.
Association of Self-Reported Leisure-Time Physical Inactivity with Particulate Matter 2.5 Air Pollution.
The Health Impact of Nonhazardous Solid Waste Disposal in a Community: The Case of the Mare Chicose Landfill in Mauritius.
Environmental Health in the 2009 State Legislative Sessions.
AWARDS & HONORS.
Enhancing the Public Health Perspective on Onsite Wastewater Systems.
The State of Communication and Its Relevance to Environmental Health.
The Meaning Behind the Upcoming New Look to the Journal.
The Environmental Health Industry: Salute to the Private Sector.
Water Safety Plans: CDC's Role.
LIFE IN VENICE.
Who Was Hall?
The Terminator Comes to Wall Street.
Purpose-Driven Life. (cover story)
Second Chances, Social Forgiveness, and the Internet.
The Man Who Shot the Man Who Shot Lincoln.
Visions and Revisions.
Dawn of a Literary Friendship.
The Living and the Dead.
The Doctor Is IN: At 88, Aaron Beck is now revered for an approach to psychotherapy that pushed Freudian analysis aside.
The Decline of the English Department: How it happened and what could be done to reverse it.
Notes from the Earth: Running Yangtze rapids, following Afghan heardsmen, four-wheeling Australia's Jack Hills—intimate contacts with natural landscapes.
A Mindful Beauty.
Armchair Travelers: The Renaissance writers and humanists Petrarch and Boccaccio turned to geography to understand the works of antiquity.
Mother Country: A daughter examines a life played out in romantic defiance of bad fortune.
Facing the Music: What 1930s pop culture can teach us about our own hard times.
Living on $500,000 a Year: What F. Scott Fitzgerald's tax returns reveal about his life and times.
Brush Up Your Berlin: And beware of kiss-me-I'm-poetical junk.
Definitions: What is an African Writer.
Stranger in Elmina.
Never About Her.
Contributors.
Editor's Note.
Shank's Mare.
Traveling.
diversity and the teacher-librarian.
culturally responsive instruction for teacher-librarians.
behind the statistics: keeping track of multicultural literature.
asian americans in literature for children and young Adults.
technology and diversity: perceptions of Idaho's "digital natives.".
the bilingual book club: a family affair.
who are we? arabs in america.
don't know much about native american students.
after school mobile literacy: serving youth in underserved neighborhoods.
english language learners in the classroom.
drill and skill web sites to share.
web feeds delivered to your digital doorstep.
information you can use.
of twisty cones and treasure mountain.
the best, notable, and recommended from 2008.
north of 49: Resource Links best of 2008.
NSLMPY winners and their tips: A recipe for your school library.
the front end load of student research.
web sites you can recommend.
the potential, the pitfalls, and the promise of multi-user virtual environments: getting a second life.
the phone: a tool for learning.
resources for our teacher-librarian.
a time to ponder, transition, grow.
yesterday, today, and tomorrow: transitions of the work but not the mission.
implementation or bust!: join the AASL standards wagon train.
update: Washington Library Media Association.
the library is the place: knowledge and thinking, thinking and knowledge.
Mad Magazine to Facebook: what have we learned?
collaboration: the library media center and educational technology.
the impact of Facebook on our students.
access to technology in transition.
The San Francisco miracle: how an urban school district went from 20 to 70 teacher-librarians.
web site options for summer break.
intellectual access to information: the teacher-librarian as facilitator.
Cry If You Want To: Cases of Mistaken Atheism Still Offensive.
Life in the Pack: Of Dogfights and Social Moralities.
DARWIN DAY CELEBRATION.
The Evolution of the Mind & What It Means to Humanism.
CHANGE WE CAN BELIEVE IN: "RACE" AND CONTINUING SELECTION IN THE HUMAN GENOME.
LOCKDOWN: ARE TEENS (AND TAXPAYERS) PAYING THE PRICE AT CHRISTIAN REFORM SCHOOLS?
SCHOOL SPIRIT.
OPERATION BABYLIFT.
Rational Sunday School.
Faith and Freedom: What's Conservative about School Prayer?
The Truth.
The Reason "Everything Happens for a Reason.".
Bad/Good Teachers.
If English Was Good Enough for Jesus….
Gay Marriage and the "Bigot" Card.
NOTHING SACRED.
Who's Being Protected under the Searing Bright Light?
HIDDEN from HISTORY.
Counterfeiting tradition.
Darwin Drama Raises Questions for Both Sides.
The DOG Delusion.
Musings of a Solo-ist Astrophysicist.
Reproductive Rights Go Green.
Baptism in Broad-mindedness.
Vampire BANKER$ (or the Nuts and Bolts of the Scam).
NOTHING SACRED.
HIDDEN from HISTORY.
Counterfeiting tradition.
STAR TREK made Me and Atheist.
The Death of the War on Drugs.
If English Was Good Enough for Jesus….
Who's Being Protected under the Searing Bright Light?
The Army Experience Center's Bad Experience: Turns out Training Kids to Kill Not Popular with Public.
Persecution Complex: Who's the Real Victim of Discrimination?
God in My Brain?
Humanism and the Burqa Bugaboo.
Claims of Conscience: Setting the Ground Rules When Rights Collide.
Confessions of a Prayer-Struck Atheist.
Original Intent.
Gay Marriage and the "Bigot" Card.
David Barton: The Religious Right's Master of Phony History.
(Re)moved by the Holy Spirit.
WOUND MADE FOUNTAIN: TOWARD A THEOLOGY OF REDEMPTION.
LONERGAN AND PANNENBERG'S METHODOLOGIES: A CRITICAL EXAMINATION.
ON THE DYNAMIC RELATION BETWEEN ECCLESIOLOGY AND CONGREGATIONAL STUDIES.
GREGORY THE GREAT AND THE SIXTH-CENTURY DISPUTE OVER THE ECUMENICAL TITLE.
INTERCONNECTEDNESS AND INTRINSIC VALUE AS ECOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES: AN APPROPRIATION OF KARL RAHNER'S EVOLUTIONARY CHRISTOLOGY.
CROSSING THE DIVIDE: FOUNDATIONS OF A THEOLOGY OF MIGRATION AND REFUGEES.
THE AFRICAN EXPERIENCE OF JESUS.
BOOKS RECEIVED.
From the Editor's Desk.
From the Editor's Desk.
THE HOLY SPIRIT AND THE PHYSICAL UNIVERSE: THE IMPACT OF SCIENTIFIC PARADIGM SHIFTS ON CONTEMPORARY PNEUMATOLOGY.
A SENSE OF THE TRAGIC IN A CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY OF FREEDOM.
THEOLOGIES OF GUADALUPE: FROM THE SPANISH COLONIAL ERA TO POPE JOHN PAUL II.
LIKE A BOAT IS MARRIAGE: AELRED ON MARRIAGE AS A CHRISTIAN WAY OF LIFE.
IMAGINATION, VIRTUE, AND HUMAN RIGHTS: LESSONS FROM AUSTRALIAN AND U.S. LAW.
FUNDAMENTAL MORAL THEOLOGY: TRADITION.
The Poverty of Citation Databases: Data Mining Is Crucial for Fair Metrical Evaluation of Research Performance.
Infectious Diseases Subdue Serengeti Lions.
Aquaculture Production and Biodiversity Conservation.
Fish, Floods, and Ecosystem Engineers: Aquatic Conservation in the Okavango Delta, Botswana.
Spurious Certainty: How Ignoring Measurement Error and Environmental Heterogeneity May Contribute to Environmental Controversies.
A Framework for Implementing Biodiversity Offsets: Selecting Sites and Determining Scale.
AIBS news.
Environmental after Bush.
AIBS news.
Ecotourism and Other Invasions.
The Ecological Role of the Mammalian Mesocarnivore.
Mercury Contamination in Sport Fish in the Northeastern United States: Considerations for Future Data Collection.
AIBS news.
Sweet Home Alabama: Hot Spot for Phylogeography.
Ecology in Times of Scarcity.
The Evolving Definition of a Gene.
The Kinetochore Moves Ahead: Contributions of Molecular and Genetic Techniques to Our Understanding of Mitosis.
Biodiversity Loss Affects Global Disease Ecology.
Dramatic Declines in North Atlantic Diadromous Fishes.
Will the Oceans Help Feed Humanity?
Citizen Science: A Developing Tool for Expanding Science Knowledge and Scientific Literacy.
To Name or Not to Name: The Effect of Changing Author Gender on Peer Review.
The Northern Rocky Mountain Gray Wolf Is Not Yet Recovered.
Minnesota's Moose: Ghosts of the Northern Forest?
Molecular Markers, Natural History, and Conservation of Marine Animals.
China's Progress toward the Significant Reduction of the Rate of Biodiversity Loss.
Effects of Timber Harvest on Amphibian Populations: Understanding Mechanisms from Forest Experiments. (cover story)
Neotropical Forest Conservation, Agricultural Intensification, and Rural Out-migration: The Mexican Experience.
BUILDING THE NEW ELECTRIC GRID.
FACTS & FISSION.
fitting a pitch.
DISRUPTION FROM THE VIRTUAL WORLD.
leading the DISPERSED WORKFORCE.
BUILDING a place for INNOVATION.
THE SPRINTER'S FOOT.
Life written Larger.
sharing the passion.
the power of the past.
EXACT constraint.
For Keeps.
NATURAL DESIGN WITH CONSTRUCTAL THEORY.
technical negotiation.
Outside In.
the Oil Age.
from simple rules, complex behavior.
“The most hazardous and dangerous and greatest adventure on which man has ever embarked.„.
nuclear's Model T.
accessible vision.
self-help.
COMPUTING.
TECH FOCUS.
marks the spot.
THE DEATH OF THE FILING CABINET.
COMPUTING.
TECH FOCUS.
$1 million a day.
TECH FOCUS.
FINDING FORCES.
the overlooked patent.
C for the Course.
A Turn of the Crank Started the Civil War.
COMPUTING.
HIGH DEFINITION flow.
COMPUTING.
NASA Turbomachinery Technical Working Group Technology Assessment.
East & West how's THAT contract WORKING for you?
FEEDBACK LOOP.
Pipe for Ultra Deepwater.
rolling with it.
Nano Entrepreneurship.
democratization of manufacturing.
coached by Newton.
patent slugfest.
The Genesis of the Steamboat.
buyer & seller.
wrangling the high-performance computer.
COMPUTING.
amazing analyses.
HYDROGEN HORIZON.
renewable sea power.
plowing new ground.
CALENDAR OF EVENTS.
PRESSURE BUILDS for user-friendliness.
Learning Lizards.
Seeing Corals with the Eye of Reason.
Flowers Have No Names.
Rocket Land.
The Living Gömböc.
TO KILL A CORMORANT.
Between a Rock and a Hyrax.
Seeing the Light.
Meet the Alloparents. (cover story)
Jewel of the Deep.
The Magic Rock Garden.
Brains of Beauties.
In Science We Trust.
Rational Fear.
A Shot in the Dark.
On Heron Pond.
The Good, the Bad and the Oily.
The Day We Found the Universe: January 1, 1925.
Splendid Isolation.
Talon Hunt.
Science en Masse.
Goblins on the March.
A Head in the Clouds.
A Long Drink of Water.
The Secret Lives of Starlings.
The Name of the Rose Tree.
2009 Young Naturalist Awards.
Exhibitions.
PSA Camera Clubs and Community Service.
Drury's Digital Diary.
Photojournalism Connections.
History of the PSA Print Collection.
Zooming in on Travel.
News.
Exhibitions.
Drury's Digital Diary.
Distinctive Image.
Yellowstone National Park.
News.
New Members.
Exhibitions.
Color Projected Image Connections.
A Brief History of PSA Chapters and PSA Member Councils.
Concrete Abstracts.
Drury's Digital Diary.
Services & Activities.
News.
New Members.
Exhibitions.
The Divisions.
Drury's Digital Diary.
OPA-LOCKA.
Working With the PSA Nature and Wildlife Definitions.
Presenting the Presenters for the 2009 PSA Conference.
Visit Yellowstone on the Bus with Us.
News.
2009 PSA Exhibition: A Showcase of What Is Good in Today's Photography.
A Kenyan Safari: The Greatest Show on Earth.
PSA's 75th Anniversary Conference of Photography. West Yellowstone, Montana . September 20-26, 2009.
A Kenyan Safari: The Greatest Show on Earth.
PSA 2009 Honors.
Faces of India.
PSA Recognition of Photographic Achievement 1997 - 2009.
2009 PSA Youth Showcase.
PSA definition of Creative Photography: altered reality.
MACRO Photography Made Easy.
Gentle Giants of Rwanda.
Body Painting.
The Well Being of Your Nature Subject is More Important Than Your Photograph.
Looking to the Future...
Drury's Digital Diary.
Metadata in Digital Photography, What is it and How Do I Use It?
Drury's Digital Diary.
Creative Images for the Digital Photographer.
Landscape Photography.
Celebrating 75 Years of PSA.
Drury's Digital Diary.
Thinking Creatively.
The Evolution of Exhibitions.
Drury's Digital Diary.
Photographing Martha's Vineyard.
Honors and Distinctions.
Metadata in Digital Photography, What is It and How do I Use It?
Photo Travel Connections.
Drury's Digital Diary.
Celebrating 75 Years of PSA.
Nature Connections.
A Vibration Reduction Lens in India.
Nature.
Photo Travel.
Drury's Digital Diary.
Elephant Seals of San Simeon.
Patriotic Tour of Normandy D-Day Beaches.
TIDE News.
Industrial Design: A Phoenix Reborn from the Ashes of Technology Education: A Case History.
Biomedical Technology: Supporting Movement.
Scaffolding Equals Success in Teaching Tablet PCs.
Gaming in Technology Education.
The Environmental Impacts of Offshore Oil Drilling.
Wind Farm Challenge.
Louisville Conference Exhibitors.
Eggciting Vehicles!
Energy from the Skies: Empowering Future Generations.
Hydroponics: Content and Rationale.
President's Message.
The Foundations of Technology Course: Teachers Like It!
A New Classroom Design Challenge.
2009 Leaders to Watch.
Calendar.
Using Engineering Cases in Technology Education.
Teaching Students about Clean Fuels and Transportation Technologies.
Adopt-a-Bud Project: An Exercise in Observation of a Tree Bud from Winter until Sprout Completion.
FOSTERING TOLERANCE OF OBESITY THROUGH EMPATHY AND CRITICAL REFLECTION: A CURRICULAR UNIT INCORPORATING FILMED TESTIMONIALS.
ACCULTURATION AND CAREER BELIEFS — IS THERE A RELATIONSHIP FOR INTERNATIONAL UNIVERSITY STUDENTS?
EXPECTATIONS OF ADULT GRADUATE STUDENTS IN AN ONLINE DEGREE PROGRAM.
PUTTING THE MIND IN THE BRAIN: PROMOTING AN APPRECIATION OF THE BIOLOGICAL BASIS TO UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR.
GENDER DIFFERENCES IN THE FACTOR STRUCTURE OF THE 2x2 ACHIEVEMENT GOAL FRAMEWORK.
STUDY OF OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH AUDIT ON FACILITIES AT UNGKU OMAR COLLEGE, UNIVERSITI KEBANGSAAN MALAYSIA (UKM): A PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS.
GENERIC COMPETENCY PROFILE AMONG STUDENTS IN INSTITUTE OF HIGHER LEARNING: A CASE OF UNIVERSITI KEBANGSAAN MALAYSIA (UKM), MALAYSIA.
THE CHALLENGES FACED BY JORDANIAN ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEACHERS AT AMMAN 1ST AND 2ND DIRECTORATES OF EDUCATION.
ON YOUR KNEES: PRAYER IN UNDERGRADUATE ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIP.
Chapter 2: Restructuring Higher Education in a European Context: Short-Cycle Higher Education in Flanders.
Balancing the Pros and Cons of Community College "Grow-Your-Own" Leadership Programs.
Trustees' Perceptions of the Desired Qualifications for the Next Generation of Community College Presidents.
Leaders as Linchpins for Framing Meaning.
Examining an Evolution: A Case Study of Organizational Change Accompanying the Community College Baccalaureate.
Educational Aspirations in an Urban Community College: Differences Between Immigrant and Native Student Groups.
English-Major Community College Presidents: A Narrative Inquiry.
THE CIVIL BEHAVIOR OF STUDENTS: A SURVEY OF SCHOOL PROFESSIONALS.
THE OPINIONS OF THE GEOGRAPHY TEACHER CANDIDATES ABOUT THE PLACE OF FIELD TRIPS IN GEOGRAPHY TEACHING.
THE CONCEPT OF LIVING AND NON-LIVING THINGS IN THE WORLD OF PRIMARY SCHOOL STUDENTS IN TURKEY.
MOTIVATIONAL FACTORS TOWARD PURSUING A CAREER IN SPECIAL EDUCATION.
HISPANIC PARENTS' PERCEPTIONS OF CHILDREN'S EDUCATION.
COLLEGE DISTANCE EDUCATION COURSES: EVALUATING BENEFITS AND COSTS FROM INSTITUTIONAL, FACULTY AND STUDENTS' PERSPECTIVES.
ARE DIARIST TEACHER TRAINEES HAPPIER THAN NON-DIARISTS? OR IS IT VICE VERSA?
CO-TEACHING: AN EDUCATIONAL PROMISE FOR CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES OR A QUICK FIX TO MEET THE MANDATES OF NO CHILD LEFT BEHIND?
DOES USING AN INTERNET BASED PROGRAM FOR IMPROVING STUDENT PERFORMANCE IN GRAMMAR AND PUNCTUATION REALLY WORK IN A COLLEGE COMPOSITION COURSE?
A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF GEOGRAPHY EDUCATION: INTERNATIONAL SAMPLES AND TURKEY.
LINGUISTIC ACTS TEACHERS USE IN THE CLASSROOM: VERBAL STIMULI.
INVESTIGATING STUDENTS MISBEHAVIOR IN CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT IN STATE AND PRIVATE PRIMARY SCHOOLS WITH A COMPARATIVE APPROACH.
AN EXAMINATION OF THE EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS HELD FOR JUVENILE DELINQUENTS IN TURKEY.
EXAMINING LANGUAGE OF INFORMATION BOOKS FOR CHILDREN.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND THE MASTER TECHNOLOGY TEACHER: THE EVOLUTION OF ONE PARTNERSHIP.
A QUALITATIVE RESEARCH ON THE TEACHING STRATEGIES AND CLASS APPLICATIONS OF THE HIGH SCHOOL TEACHERS WHO TEACH ENGLISH IN TURKEY AS A FOREIGN LANGUAGE.
BASIC FACTORS THAT AFFECT GENERAL ACADEMIC MOTIVATION LEVELS OF CANDIDATE PRESCHOOL TEACHERS.
THREE PHASE RANKING FRAMEWORK FOR ASSESSING CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING IN ALGEBRA USING MULTIPLE REPRESENTATIONS.
PREFERENCES FOR KEY ETHICAL PRINCIPLES THAT GUIDE BUSINESS SCHOOL STUDENTS.
THE ROLE OF THE ARAB OPEN UNIVERSITY, AS A DISTANCE EDUCATION INSTITUTION, IN SOCIAL COMMUNICATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN THE ARAB REGION.
THE EFFECT OF CONCEPT MAPPING AND PROBLEM SOLVING TEACHING STRATEGIES ON ACHIEVEMENT IN BIOLOGY AMONG NIGERIAN SECONDARY SCHOOL STUDENTS.
THE ELEPHANT IN THE CLASSROOM:
HOW CAN WE HELP OUR CHILDREN SUCCEED?
AN ANALYSIS OF THE WRITING DISPOSITION OF FOURTH AND FIFTH GRADE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL PUPILS.
THE CHANGING FACE OF AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION IN NIGERIA:
STUDENT PERSPECTIVES ON HOMEWORK.
DATA DRIVEN DECISION MAKING IN THE SOCIAL STUDIES.
DETERMINING THE COMPREHENSIBILITY OF TEXTS IN SIXTH GRADE TURKISH COURSE BOOKS.
THE EFFECTS OF PEER TRAINING ON THE SOCIAL INTERACTIONS OF CHILDREN WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS.
AN EVALUATION OF THE PROBLEMS OF SOLID WASTES AT ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS DEPENDING ON THE VIEWS OF SCHOOL ADMINISTRATORS.
WHY DO THEY TEACH?
PROMOTING RESILIENCY AMONG NATIVE AMERICAN STUDENTS TO PREVENT DROPOUTS.
TEACHING BUSINESS ETHICS AFTER THE FINANCIAL MELTDOWN:
RELIABILITY AND VALIDITY ANALYSIS OF THE MULTIPLE INTELLIGENCE PERCEPTION SCALE.
THE IMPACT OF GEOGRAPHICAL TRIPS ON GEOGRAPHY TEACHING.
NON-RENEWAL OF PROBATIONARY TEACHERS:
PASSING THE TORCH:
EVALUATION OF TURKISH EDUCATION PROGRAMS.
The Differentiation Conditions for the Reasons of Stress in Teachers Candidates According to Their Branches and Departments.
Excessive Internet Use and Loneliness Among Secondary School Students.
The Anti-Anxiety Curriculum: Combating Math Anxiety in the Classroom.
Collaborative Testing and Achievement: Are Two Heads Really Better Than One?
Field Trips in College Biology and Ecology Courses: Revisiting Benefits and Drawbacks.
Exploration of Classroom Participation in the Presence of a Token Economy.
Do Students Know if They Answered Particular Questions Correctly on a Psychology Exam?
Retrospective Miscue Analysis and the Socialization of One Young Adult Reader.
Integrating the Design Mathematical Trail in Mathematics Curriculum for the Sixth Grade Student.
Highly Qualified Teacher Requirements for Special Educators: Perceptions of West Virginia Stakeholders.
The Last Airbender.
Avatar.
The Last Song.
Temple Grandin.
Oliver Twist.
William Shakespeare's Love's Labour's Lost.
A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court.
Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief.
Oceans: Into the Deep.
Shooting Star.
What I Do for Love.
Welcome to My World!
Lean, Green, Eco-Machines.
Get the Lead Out.
Write On, Women.
My Birthmark and Me.
FACTS INTO ACTION.
A Walk Through Harlem.
Dancing With the Words.
My Full Life.
Anne Frank in 2010.
TSI: TEEN SCIENCE INVESTIGATIONS.
Youth Participatory Action Research Groups as School Counseling Interventions.
Parent Perceptions of Barriers to Academic Success in a Rural Middle School.
American Indian Adolescents and Disordered Eating.
Learning From Each Other: A Portrait of Family-School-Community Partnerships in the United States and Mexico.
A Multidimensional Study of School-Family-Community Partnership Involvement: School, School Counselor, and Training Factors.
Number Sense in Kindergarten: A Factor-Analytic Study of the Construct.
Validating a Number Sense Screening Tool for Use in Kindergarten and First Grade: Prediction of Mathematics Proficiency in Third Grade.
Enhancing the Effectiveness of Special Education Programming for Children With Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Using a Daily Report Card.
Gender Differences in Early Literacy: Analysis of Kindergarten through Fifth-Grade Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early Literacy Skills Probes.
Identifying Children in Middle Childhood Who Are at Risk for Reading Problems.
Examining Readability Estimates' Predictions of Students' Oral Reading Rate: Spache, Lexile, and Forcast.
Principals' Perceptions of the Importance and Availability of Response to Intervention Practices Within High School Settings.
Thoughts on Rethinking Response to Intervention With Secondary Students.
National Association of School Psychologists Principles for Professional Ethics.
Theorising education and learning in social movements: environmental justice campaigns in Scotland and India.
Beyond Smash and Crash: Part Two.
Hydrogen Fuel Cells: Part of the Solution.
Excellence: The Importance of Vision and Work Ethic.
Preferences of Male and Female Students for TSA Competitive Events.
Africa in Theory:
Intimate Engagements of the Public Kind.
Dead White Men: An Essay on the Changing Dynamics of Race in US Action Cinema.
Contesting Anti-Semitism: Human Rights, Israel Bashing, and the Making of a Non-Problem.
Introduction: Culture In, Culture Out.
Being in the World (of Warcraft): Raiding, Realism, and Knowledge Production in a Massively Multiplayer Online Game.
Digital Expertise in Online Journalism (and Anthropology).
Science of Uncertainty: Making Cases for Drug Incorporation in Brazil.
Promiscuous Girls, Good Wives, and Cheating Husbands: Gender Inequality, Transitions to Marriage, and Infidelity in Southeastern Nigeria.
Declarations of Independents: On Local Knowledge and Localist Knowledge.
Fall of a Sacred Fortress.
India's Village of the DEAD.
Child's Play.
The Indus Enigma.
DIGGING THE SCORCHED EARTH.
Korean Love Affair.
Should We CLONE Neanderthals?
Common Ground.
Able Was I Ere I Saw . . . New Jersey?
Layers of the Past.
Trophy Skulls and Beer.
First Minoan Shipwreck.
Warrior Tut.
Catch a Pithecus by the Toe.
Bon Voyage, Caveman.
WORLD ROUNDUP.
Saving the Past.
WORLD ROUNDUP.
The Power of Chocolate.
House of the Chaste Lovers.
Sunken Dreams.
Unraveling the Etruscan Enigma.
Fortress of Solitude.
No Saints in Jerusalem.
The Mines that Built Empires.
Resurrecting the Maize King.
Uncovering the Arawaks.
Ring of Hype?
Rewriting Jewish History.
Battle for the Xinjiang Mummies.
Cities Upon Cities.
Rediscovering Paestum.
Bouncing Back from the Ice Age.
Rescuing a Mystery Wreck.
Lasers in the Jungle.
WORLD ROUNDUP.
Etruscan Daily Life.
Education and Preservation at Umm el-Jimal.
WORLD ROUNDUP.
Constant Companions.
‘Half-breeds,’ racial opacity, and geographies of crime: law’s search for the ‘original’ Indian.
Literary geography and the short story: setting and narrative style.
Pilgrims: an ethnography of sacredness.
INITIAL STATUS IN GROWTH CURVE MODELING FOR RANDOMIZED TRIALS.
BASELINE ABSTINENCE MAY MODERATE SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER INTERVENTION EFFECTS.
INFLUENCES OF COVARIATES ON GROWTH MIXTURE MODELING.
A MARGINAL STRUCTURAL MODELING APPROACH TO ASSESS THE CUMULATIVE EFFECT OF DRUG TREATMENT ON LATER DRUG USE ABSTINENCE.
DIFFERENCES IN MORTALITY AMONG HEROIN, COCAINE, AND METHAMPHETAMINE USERS: A HIERARCHICAL BAYESIAN APPROACH.
EVALUATION OF LONGITUDINAL INTERVENTION EFFECTS: AN EXAMPLE OF LATENT GROWTH MIXTURE MODELS FOR ORDINAL DRUG-USE OUTCOMES.
ARE THERE GENDER DIFFERENCES IN ARREST TRAJECTORIES AMONG ADULT DRUG ABUSE TREATMENT PARTICIPANTS?
UNDERSTANDING RANDOM EFFECTS IN GROUP-BASED TRAJECTORY MODELING: AN APPLICATION OF MOFFITT'S DEVELOPMENTAL TAXONOMY.
INVESTIGATING STABILITY AND CHANGE IN SUBSTANCE USE AND CRIMINAL ACTIVITY USING A SYNTHESIZED LONGITUDINAL MODELING APPROACH.
USING THE GROUP-BASED DUAL TRAJECTORY MODEL TO ANALYZE TWO RELATED LONGITUDINAL OUTCOMES.
The Lived Experience of Heart Failure at the End of Life: A Systematic Literature Review.
A Native American Perspective on Spiritual Assessment: The Strengths and Limitations of a Complementary Set of Assessment Tools.
What Are the Parent-Reported Reasons for Unmet Mental Health Needs in Children?
Comorbid Mental Health Symptoms and Heart Diseases: Can Health Care and Mental Health Care Professionals Collaboratively Improve the Assessment and Management?
Assessing Trauma, Substance Abuse, and Mental Health in a Sample of Homeless Men.
Disparities in Access to Substance Abuse Treatment among People with Intellectual Disabilities and Serious Mental Illness.
Perceived Racism and Discrimination in Children and Youths: An Exploratory Study.
Does Health Insurance Matter? Health beyond Universal Coverage.
Young, Pregnant, and Underinsured: Growing Demand Calls for Cost-Effective Collaboration between Health and Social Workers.
Coping with Triplets: Perspectives of Parents during the First Four Years.
Using Art as a Self-Regulating Tool in a War Situation: A Model for Social Workers.
Is There Disparity in Physician Service Use? A Comparison of Hispanic and White Medicare Beneficiaries.
Challenges and Mental Health Experiences of Lesbian and Bisexual Women Who Are Trying to Conceive.
Tailoring Disaster Mental Health Services to Diverse Needs: An Analysis of 36 Crisis Counseling Projects.
Soothing the Strains in Nursing Homes.
The Paradox of Aging.
Survival Strategies for Physical Educators During Recessionary Times.
Physical Education and Language Integration:
An Analysis of Spectrum Research on Teaching.
Defining High School Hazing:
An Evaluation of Secondary School Physical Education Websites.
Multiple Intelligences in Virtual and Traditional Skill Instructional Learning Environments.
Promoting Preservice Teacher Reflectivity: Van Manen May Represent a Viable Model.
Coaching Peripheral Vision Training for Soccer Athletes.
Physical Education Waivers and Young Adult Activity.
Adherence to a Physical Activity Program by Older Adults in Brazil.
Elementary School Classroom Teacher Delivered Physical Education: Costs, Benefits and Barriers.
Do Sports Build or Reveal Character?--An Exploratory Study at One Service Academy.
Practicum in a Self-Contained Environment: Pre-Service Teacher Perceptions of Teaching Students with Disabilities.
Out on the Playing Field: Providing Quality Physical Education and Recreational Opportunities for Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Youth.
Ethical Challenges of Military Social Workers Serving in a Combat Zone.
Learning from a Community Action Plan to Promote Safe Sexual Practices.
Sub-Saharan African Women Living with HIV/AIDS: An Exploration of General and Spiritual Coping Strategies.
Social Work Practitioners and the Human--Companion Animal Bond: A National Study.
Listening to the Voices of Children in Foster Care: Youths Speak Out about Child Welfare Workforce Turnover and Selection.
We Are Not Criminals: Social Work Advocacy and Unauthorized Migrants.
Does American Social Work Have a Progressive Tradition?
The Beginning of a New Decade: Social Work 2010.
Youths in Crisis.
Adoption Activities on the Internet:
Factors Contributing to Disproportionality in the Child Welfare System:
Mentoring for Young People Leaving Foster Care:
Frontline Worker Responses to Domestic Violence Disclosure in Public Welfare Offices.
Caregivers, School Liaisons, and Agency Advocates Speak Out about the Educational Needs of Children and Youths in Foster Care.
Growing Together:
Parental Acceptance and Illegal Drug Use among Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Adolescents:
Enhancing Adolescent Brain Development through Goal-Setting Activities.
If Only She Would Play? The Impact of Sports Participation On Self-Esteem, School Adjustment, and Substance Use Among Rural and Urban African American Girls.
Predicting Subjective Athletic Performance from Psychological Skills after Controlling for Sex and Sport.
Developmental Trends in Athletic Identity: A Two-Part Retrospective Study.
Understanding College Sport Fans' Experiences of and Attempts to Cope with Shame.
Fanship and Fandom: Comparisons Between Sport and Non-Sport Fans.
Smoke and Mirrors or Wave of the Future? Evaluating a Mental Skills Training Program for Elite Cross Country Skiers.
Perceived Coaching Leadership of Youth Athletes in Singapore.
Effects of Match Location on Playing Tactics for Goal Scoring in Norwegian Professional Soccer.
Examining the Use of Psychological Skills Throughout Soccer Performance.
Assessment of Indoor Route-finding Technology for People Who Are Visually Impaired.
Profile of Personnel Preparation Programs in Visual Impairment and Their Faculty.
The Expanded Core Curriculum: Where We Have Been, Where We Are Going, and How We Can Get There.
Health-Related Fitness of Youths with Visual Impairments.
Sensitivity and Specificity of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment Modified for Individuals Who Are Visually Impaired.
Do People Who Became Blind Early in Life Develop a Better Sense of Smell? A Psychophysical Study.
An Assessment-for-Learning System in Mathematics for Individuals with Visual Impairments.
Language and Play in Students with Multiple Disabilities and Visual Impairments or Deaf-Blindness.
The Employment and Postsecondary Educational Status of Transition-Age Youths with Visual Impairments.
A Computer Program for Training Eccentric Reading in Persons with Central Scotoma.
Gender Differences and the Risk of Falls in Individuals with Profound Vision Loss.
Teaching the Use of a Long Cane Step by Step: Suggestions for Progressive, Methodical Instruction.
Visual Search Training and Obstacle Avoidance in Adults with Visual Impairments.
Could Specific Braille Reading Difficulties Result from Developmental Dyslexia?
Contrast Sensitivity Function Scores, Choices of Illuminated Stand Magnifiers, and Reading.
Education for Students with Visual Impairments in Singapore: An Overview of Primary and Secondary Programs.
Mainstream Employment in Music Production for Individuals Who Are Visually Impaired: Development of a Model Training Program.
The Unified English Braille Code: Examination by Science, Mathematics, and Computer Science Technical Expert Braille Readers.
Alcohol Use in German Adolescents with Visual Impairments and Sighted Adolescents.
The Treasure in Leisure Activities: Fostering Resilience in Young People Who Are Blind.
Family and Nation.
Uncommon Threads: Wabanaki Textiles, Clothing, and Costume.
Kennewick Man: Perspectives on the Ancient One.
The Land Has Memory: Indigenous Knowledge, Native Landscapes, and the National Museum of the American Indian.
A Cultural History of the Native Peoples of Southern New England: Voices from Past and Present.
We Have a Religion: The 1920s Pueblo Indian Dance Controversy and American Religious Freedom.
Pulling Down the Clouds.
The Indigenous Researcher as Individual and Collective.
The Flemish Bastard and the Former Indians.
Shared Images: The Innovative Jewelry of Yazzie Johnson & Gail Bird.
Helping Others Defend Themselves.
The Brussels Wall.
The Global Glass Ceiling.
From the Sun King to Karzai.
Taipei Is Not Helsinki.
A Few Dollars at a Time.
The New Population Bomb.
Not So Dire Straits.
The Long Road to Zero.
Mind Over Martyr.
The Best Defense?
The Difficult Art of Finlandization.
Gilley Replies.
Stopping Proliferation Before It Starts.
Prisoners of the Caucasus.
Obama and the Americas.
Ukrainian Blues.
Leading Through Civilian Power.
American Profligacy and American Power.
GDP Now Matters More Than Force.
Irresponsible Stakeholders?
The Demographic Future.
Back to School.
The Digital Disruption.
Democracy in Cyberspace.
A Globalized God.
The Fertile Continent.
Globalizing the Energy Revolution.
The Rise of the Mezzanine Rulers.
Manufacturing Insecurity.
The Game Changer.
Pax Ottomana?
A New Global Player.
Smaller and Safer.
Fear and Loathing in Nairobi.
Mugabe Über Alles.
Compelled to Dissent:
RECENTLY PROCESSED MANUSCRIPT COLLECTIONS, CATALOGED MATERIAL, AND MAPS AT THE GEORGIA HISTORICAL SOCIETY.
James Gunn:
RECENTLY PROCESSED MANUSCRIPT COLLECTIONS, CATALOGED MATERIAL, AND MAPS AT THE GEORGIA HISTORICAL SOCIETY.
That Cursed Evil Rum: The Trustees' Prohibition Policy in Colonial Georgia.
Hydrology and Residential Segregation in the Postwar South: An Environmental History of Atlanta, 1865-1895.
Barriers to the Truth.
A Very British Crime Wave.
Philip II: A Pen Portrait.
Ship of State.
Rome 1960: Making Sporting History.
A Path to Peace Inspired by the Past.
Lets Kill All the Lawyers.
Beyond the Auschwitz Syndrome.
The Lure of Volcanoes.
The Sceptical Realist.
The Medieval Pacifist.
Chatham House and the Lessons of History.
A Novel for Hysterical Times.
The Man Who Remade Alexandria.
A First Step Towards Democracy.
The Pentrich Rebellion.
Trial of the Century.
Our Man in Liberia.
Exception to the Rule.
The Lady and the Earl.
Beyond Belief.
The Lure of the Orient.
Living a Lie.
The life and times of Hugh Owen Thomas.
France Votes Yes.
The Argument in Favor.
How the "Sons of Iraq" Stabilized Iraq.
The European Component.
The American Component.
Egypt after Mubarak.
Worldwide Trends in Honor Killings.
Anwar al-Awlaki: "I Pray that Allah Destroys America.".
Can Jihadis Be Rehabilitated?
How to Support the Struggle for Iran's Soul.
Russian and Chinese Support for Tehran.
An Ayatollah Condemns an Unjust Ruler.
Is Mousavi a Reformer?
Steven Emerson: Combating Radical Islam.
Syria's Path to Islamist Terror.
Syria's Financial Support for Jihad.
The Gulf States in the Shadow of Iran.
Who Rules Iran?
The Norman Invasion of Sicily, 1061-1072: Numbers and Military Tactics.
Paper Bullets: American Psywar in the Pacific, 1944-1945.
Tolerance As a Crime? The British Treatment of German Prisoners of War on the Western Front, 1914-1918.
The Schlieffen Plan’s ‘Ghost Divisions’ March Again: A Reply to Terence Holmes.
Combined Arms during the Hundred Days Campaign, August—November 1918.
The Italian Air Force from the Eve of the Libyan Conflict to the First World War.
Elizabeth Bowen and the New Cosmopolitanism.
The Last Quatrain: Gwendolyn Brooks and the Ends of Ballads.
True Colours, Faux Flags, and Tattered Sales.
Locating the Mano Mask.
Popular Images of the AIDS Epidemic.
What Is This Place?
Between Cultural Lag and Confusion: The Reception of African Art in Italy.
Recolonization of an African Visual Economy.
Ephemeral Fang Reliquaries.
Fish/Fetish(!?): A Note on "Mami Wata: Arts for Water Spirits in Africa and Its Diasporas"
On the Verge.
Negroes Are Leaving Paragould by Hundreds: Racial Cleansing in a Northeast Arkansas Railroad Town, 1880-1920s.
Delta Sources and Resources.
Wrecking NASA.
What Kind of Socialist Is Barack Obama?
A Triumph for Political Speech.
Ransoming Gilad Shalit.
In Praise of Prose.
The Star Who Didn't Care.
The Purposes of Political Combat.
The Deconstructionist's Sabbath.
The Anti-American Fallacy.
Taking Tea with the Taliban.
The Homegrown-Terrorist Threat.
Ignoring 'Climategate'.
The Problem with Purim.
The Deadly Price of Pursuing Peace.
Obama's Next Three Years.
A Never-Ending Economic Crisis?
Why Jews Hate Palin.
The Decline of the Audience.
Who Is a British Jew?
Was Thelonious Monk s Music Crazy?
The Liberal Crisis.
Moynihan:
Two Popes, One Holocaust.
The Palestinian Proletariat.
The MacArthur Mistake.
The Howard Jacobson Question.
The Original Movie Mogul.
"The Report of our Death was Greatly Exaggerated.
De-Romanticizing the Blues.
The Other Existential Threat.
The Global Poverty Paradox.
The Mosque and the Mythical Backlash.
Two Decades of the Rushdie Rules.
What Public-Sector Unions Have Wrought.
California, There It Went.
When the Jewish Mother Was an Icon.
Plenty of Nothing.
The Few, The Proud, The Chosen.
The Failure of the Liberal Economic Experiment?
Investing, Then and Now and Always.
A Blind Eye to Campus Anti-Semitism?
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Big Talker.
The Anti-Beauty Myth.
Iran Cannot Be Contained.
Notes of an Alien Son: Immigrant Visions.
Letter Home in a Foreign Language.
Square Peg for a Square Hole.
Is There Musical Meaning in the Musical ?
Strings Got Rhythm.
No Wasted Moments Planning Purposeful Transitions.
Teamwork in the Music Room.
Cultivating Audiences Taming, Teaching, Transforming.
Implement a "Connecting Parents with Learning Project" in Your School.
Challenges Facing Guitar Education.
Steel Band Repertoire The Case for Original Music.
A Classroom Recording Studio.
News and Information Music Educators.
Recent Journal Articles.
Technology for Teaching.
Recognition, Vertigo, and Passionate Worldliness.
A Deeper Consideration.
Letter from Beirut.
Dust and Stones.
Green I Love You Green.
The Great Scorer.
Poetry Is a Dumb-Ass Spider.
This Land Is Our Land.
Introduction.
Lazy Bastardism: A Notebook.
MOCKING THE MOTHERS OF THE NOVEL:
25 TIPS to sharpen your writing.
BUILD CHARACTERS with simile, metaphor and symbol.
What to pack IN YOUR FICTION TOOL KIT.
5 ways into a story.
Build a solid story around a STRONG CHARACTER.
The 007 way to write a thriller.
Go on.
Use imagery to bring your story to life:
The art of the travel essay:
Be a jack-of-all-trades:
Writing toward the light.
The top 5 poetry fallacies debunked.
Making time to write.
10 tough lessons to heed in your writing career.
The pleasures and perils of prologues.
Create your own WRITERS RETREAT.
The socially intelligent writer.
The two-part query test.
How to edit an anthology.
Writing scared.
Do a book tour from home.
3 RULES for successful co-writing.
Theme is what unifies your story.
Harness the power of line breaks: Find out what line breaks can do for your free verse, and 6 ways to make the most of them.
Save time with 7 writing templates: By tweaking proven formulas for regular correspondence, you'll work more efficiently.
Great Web sites for writers.
How to expand on a spark of an idea: Ask yourself a series of questions to help get the poem in your head onto the page.
Improve your fiction with film techniques.
How to impress agents and editors: Preparation is key for one-on-one meetings at conferences and other events.
8 ways to bring your story to life.
Mastering the historical travel article: An award winner in the field advises on how to communicate the 'excitement of discovery,' thereby enticing readers—and editors.
Don't be afraid of striking out: In writing, as in baseball, you have to stick with it to hit one out of the park.
Writing to the letter: Experiment with 3 playful forms to take your composition to a new micro-level.
Which way—do-it-yourself or traditional?: An author who's been down both roads describes some issues worth considering
What a 'character': Dickens was a master at creating memorable individuals and bringing them to life. Why not put some of his techniques to work in your own fiction?
Journaling without the journal: Our author 'cradles an unformed idea' in her head before she sits down to write.
Dedicate yourself to a writing apprenticeship: If you apply long hours of study, you, too, can eventually master the tools of the trade.
The special power of present tense.
A few hard-earned lessons: Her third book experience was the charm for this humor writer, who offers some practical tips on the do-it-yourself option.
In praise of the short story.
Building a structure for "Bedlam": A writer's plan for trying up the elements of a story ran into an obstacle course.
Writing for military magazines: Enthusiasts who pitch fresh topics are welcome contributors to this popular niche.
Sometimes you have to let a book go: Even when a project stalls, you can learn how to become a stronger writer.
The art of terror: Tap into readers' fears with 5 techniques for an emotionally rich story.
Get started with prewriting techniques: They're a basic way to overcome fear and to develop and organize your ideas.
Learn from experienced newspaper reporters: Here are 11 tips that can help freelancers strengthen their writing and research skills.
'How do you find people to write about?': You begin by developing the writer's sense of alertness to potential stories, says this veteran magazine columnist.
Earth to writer—listen up: A former science-fiction/fantasy editor at Penguin and Random House describes the most common writing and marketing mistakes she saw.
Write what you know—and be sorry: A novelist known for his 'mind-bending' originality take aim at the most common of all literary aphorisms.
How to evaluate potential clients: In 5 simple steps, you can quickly determine whether or not a lead is worth pursuing.
Good intentions: Memoirists worry their words will cause harm—but can their stories heal relationships?
Focus on the story, not readers: In fiction, if you write the story that wants to be told, you'll win a wider audience.
Think ahead of the curve: Predicting future trends can be a freelancer's ace in the hole. Here are some tips on how to cultivate that sixth sense.
Got 'pitch-slapped'? Here's how to shake off a rude rejection.
Confessions of a writing-book junkie: How an MFA graduate and teacher set her books aside to gain confidence in her skills.
How to get your play read: Here are some inside tips on how to win an audition, and maybe an audience, too.
Write travel articles without traveling: An authority on the technique describes how to sell an array of service and advice stories without leaving your home.
Character goals: a crucial part of your story.
Two lives, and one secret journal: How a memoir writer struggled with the challenge of a dual story line.
Writing white papers for fun and profit: How to get these 'plum assignments' that blend elements of articles and brochures.
Know the 8 C's of effective nonfiction: Follow these tips to entertain your readers with a creative yet credible story.
Take a productive break from writing: 7 avoidance activities that are actually good for your work.
Not done yet.
The WILLIAM REHNQUIST YOU DIDN'T KNOW.
A PATENT ON PROBLEMS.
turn-around.
DOES CONNECTICUT HATE THE NET?
ABA ANNOUNCES NOMINATIONS.
Police De-text-ive.
Who Let the Dogs In?
Closing Theme.
Get Your Head in the Cloud.
UNSETTLING ADVOCATE.
Spam -- a Lot.
You Say You Want a Revolution.
Evasion.
CEOs OF THE FUTURE.
Building the Angolan model.
THE TRANSFORMER.
CHICAGO ON THE YANGTZE.
Equatorial Guinea: The rebirth of a nation.
From Colonial Poverty To 21st Century Player.
THE TYRANNY OF METAPHOR.
NIGHT OF THE LIVING WONKS.
WATCHING the WATCHERS.
THE GREAT BATTERY RACE.
RONALD REAGAN.
IN THE BEGINNING THERE WAS SOMALIA.
EDITOR'S FOREWORD.
GENERATIONAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE OF U.S.-RUSSIAN RELATIONS.
RUSSIAN DILEMMAS IN A MULTIPOLAR WORLD.
RUSSIA, UKRAINE, AND CENTRAL EUROPE: THE RETURN OF GEOPOLITICS.
UKRAINE'S DEFENSE ENGAGEMENT WITH THE UNITED STATES.
THE GLOBAL EXPANSION OF RUSSIA'S ENERGY GIANTS.
WHY RUSSIA IS NOT SOUTH KOREA.
RUSSIA'S FINANCIAL CRISIS: ECONOMIC SETBACKS AND POLICY RESPONSES.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION WITHOUT FREEDOM OF THE PRESS.
A BALANCED ASSESSMENT OF RUSSIAN CIVIL SOCIETY.
THE RUSSIAN SOLDIER TODAY.
BEING HONEST ABOUT BEING HONEST AGENTS.
JUDGES AS HONEST AGENTS.
WHY CONSERVATIVES, AND OTHERS, HAVE TROUBLE SUPPORTING THE MEANINGFUL ENFORCEMENT OF FREE EXERCISE RIGHTS.
FEDERALISM AND FAITH REDUX.
RELIGION AND ITS RELATION TO LIMITED GOVERNMENT.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION AND THE WAR ON TERROR.
CAN CONGRESS OVERTURN KENNEDY V. LOUISIANA?
RATIONAL PLEADING IN THE MODERN WORLD OF CIVIL LITIGATION: THE LESSONS AND PUBLIC POLICY BENEFITS OF TWOMBLY AND IQBAL.
Arenas of Power in Climate Change Policymaking.
Proceedings of the PSO: No. 10.
A Founder: Aaron Wildavsky and the Study of Public Policy.
Educating Citizens or Defying Federal Authority? A Comparative Study of In-State Tuition for Undocumented Students.
LEGAL, SAFETY AND BUDGETARY ISSUES IN DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING A HEALTH PROMOTION/EDUCATION STUDY ABROAD COURSE.
The Linking Lives Health Education Program: A Randomized Clinical Trial of a Parent-Based Tobacco Use Prevention Program for African American and Latino Youths.
Persistent Psychopathology in the Wake of Civil War: Long-Term Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Nimba County, Liberia.
Public Health Surveillance for Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus : Comparison of Methods for Classifying Health Care--and Community-Associated Infections.
Gun Shows and Gun Violence: Fatally Flawed Study Yields Misleading Results.
A Population-Based Study of Sexual Orientation Identity and Gender Differences in Adult Health.
Rethinking HIV/AIDS Disclosure Among Women Within the Context of Motherhood in South Africa.
Willful Misconduct: How the US Government Prevented Tobacco-Disabled Veterans From Obtaining Disability Pensions.
Consumer Awareness of Fast-Food Calorie Information in New York City After Implementation of a Menu Labeling Regulation.
Cynthia Gómez: On the Road for Health Equity.
Utilization of Research in Policymaking for Graduated Driver Licensing.
The Role of School Health Centers in Health Care Access and Client Outcomes.
Relationship Between Past Food Deprivation and Current Dietary Practices and Weight Status Among Cambodian Refugee Women in Lowell, MA.
Anti-alcohol Posters in Poland, 1945-1989: Diverse Meanings, Uncertain Effects.
Recruiting and Retaining Primary Care Physicians in Urban Underserved Communities: The Importance of Having a Mission to Serve.
Applying the Chronic Care Model to Homeless Veterans: Effect of a Population Approach to Primary Care on Utilization and Clinical Outcomes.
The Tobacco Use Management System: Analyzing Tobacco Control From a Systems Perspective.
The "We Card" Program: Tobacco Industry "Youth Smoking Prevention" as Industry Self-Preservation.
Application of a System Dynamics Model to Inform Investment in Smoking Cessation Services in New Zealand.
‘Getting back to real living’: a qualitative study of the process of community reintegration after stroke.
Strategies for saving money.
Let down by the NHS.
Can preventive services survive?
Back on track after Baby P.
Conduct on the cusp.
Funds transfer in the balance.
Getting on with the job.
Cot deaths pinpointed.
Risk and resilience in the early years.
The beauty of working in Scotland.
Call for international rescue.
Keeping birth parents in the loop.
Tale of two partnership.
Lonely no longer.
A tough case to prove.
Specialist team earns trast of travellers.
Is this client culpable or vulnerable?
Maintaining older people's dignity.
Identifying young people's needs.
'We are not cutting corners'.
'We want out'.
Children with additional needs.
Why funding must be reformed.
A calm approach to suicide prevention.
Opportunity and diversity in London.
Personalisation losing favour among social workers.
Cuts threaten transformation agenda.
The doubts remain.
Mental health champions spread word.
Services for people with multiple disabilities.
Something to say for themselves.
Kent's foster care scheme makes its point.
Forty years on From the Disability Act.
Ethical issues in the use of telecare.
Social workers suect abuse, threats and violence.
No room at the refuge.
Understanding private fostering.
Evidence grows for specialist teams.
New Dimensions.
Record the narrative, not data.
Boy made to perform sex online.
Artistic licence for children in care.
A Pearl of a dementia scheme.
Making the mind willing.
Why the North East is warmer than the South.
What's the matter with CAF?
The year of living frugally.
Root and branch review of sector.
Solutions in supervision.
Bearing with ness.
Providing the skills for dementia care.
Palliative role in dementia.
The changing face of personalisation.
Health and efficiency.
Taking the stigma out of social work.
Death With Dignity.
At the Cutting Edge: Creative and Holistic Responses to Self-Injury.
The Why of It All.
Ectopic thymic tissue presenting as a neck mass in children: A report of 3 cases.
Correlation between the Voice Handicap Index and voice laboratory measurements after phonosurgery.
Laryngeal cancer in patients younger than 30 years: A review of 99 cases.
HLA-B27-associated bilateral Ménière disease.
Cerebellopontine angle ganglionic hamartoma: Case report.
Pleomorphic adenoma of the nasal cavity: A case report.
Double bilobed radial forearm free flap for anterior tongue and floor-of-mouth reconstruction.
Sensitivity and specificity of rapid antigen detection testing for diagnosing pharyngitis in the emergency department.
Reverse radial artery forearm flap in a case of giant hairy nevus of the face.
Nasolacrimal duct oncocytoma: An unusual cause of chronic epiphora.
Lingual tonsil hypertrophy causing severe dysphagia: Treatment with plasma-mediated radiofrequency-based ablation (Coblation).
Disseminated plasmacytoma of the thyroid.
Proton pump inhibitor suppression of calcium absorption presenting as respiratory distress in a patient with bilateral laryngeal paralysis and hypocalcemia.
Cervical lymphangioma: An acquired idiopathic presentation in an adult.
Cervical necrotizing fasciitis: Our experience with 11 cases and our technique for surgical debridement.
Kimura disease: An unusual cause of head and neck masses. Report of 2 cases.
MRI findings in a patient with glossopharyngeal neuralgia.
Endoscopic cricopharyngeal myotomy for Zenker diverticulum using the harmonic scalpel.
Inferior turbinate osteoma: Case report.
Paget disease and chronic osteomyelitis of the mandible.
Sinonasal teratocarcinosarcoma: MRI and F18-FDG-PET/CT imaging.
Acute suppurative neonatal parotitis: Case report.
Intraosseous approach to vascular access in adult resuscitation.
REDUCING ADMISSIONS WITH SOCIAL ENTERPRISES.
Making clinical decisions in emergency situations.
FAMILY-WITNESSED RESUSCITATION.
Unscheduled care: learning from video-recorded consultations.
How clinical practice placements affect professional development.
To Breastfeed or Not To Breastfeed:
Effectiveness, Suitability, and Performance Testing of the SKC® Deployable Particulate Sampler (DPS) As Compared to the Currently Deployed Airmetrics&trace; MiniVol™ Portable Air Sampler.
AWARDS & HONORS.
ADVANCEMENT OF THE SCIENCE.
ADVANCEMENT OF THE SCIENCE.
The Kansas City, Missouri, Ground-Level Ozone (GLO) Project:
Reduced PM&lt;sub&gt;2.5&lt;/sub&gt; in Trujillo, Peru, on El Dia Sin Autos ("The Day Without Cars").
Does Cosmic Weather Affect Infant Mortality Rate?
State Legislatures Prepare to Address Environmental Public Health Issues in 2010 Legislative Sessions.
Global Environmental Health:
National Environmental Health Association (NEHA) Position on Offshore Oil Drilling.
ADVANCEMENT OF THE PRACTICE:
The Challenges of Sustainable Access to Safe Drinking Water in Rural Areas of Developing Countries: Case of Zawtar El-Charkieh, Southern Lebanon.
Rapid Detection of Enterococci in Marine Beach Water by Immunomagnetic Capture and Bioluminescence and Its Comparison With Conventional Methods.
Assessment of Qualifications Needed by Environmental Health Graduates Entering Private-Sector Employment. (cover story)
The Investigation of Noise Attenuation by Plants and the Corresponding Noise-Reducing Spectrum.
Surveying the Food Safety Training Needs of Environmental Health Specialists in the U.S. (cover story)
Issues and Framework of Environmental Health in Malaysia.
Approaching a Perfect Storm: Responding to New Challenges Without Losing Critical Core Capacities.
General Public Health Considerations for Responding to Animal Hoarding Cases. (cover story)
The National Exposure Registry: History and Lessons Learned.
The Greening of NEHA.
Keep on Swimming!
Assessment of Athletic Health Care Facility Surfaces for MRSA in the Secondary School Setting. (cover story)
Prevalence of Community- Associated Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus in High School Wrestling Environments.
A Pilot Survey of In-Service Home Arsenic Tracked in from Chromated Copper Arsenate--Treated Decks.
Exposure to Video Display Terminals and Risk of Small-for-Gestational-Age Birth.
Nitrate and Nitrite Levels of Potable Water Supply in Warri, Nigeria: A Public Health Concern.
Urban Heat Island and Air Pollution--An Emerging Role for Hospital Respiratory Admissions in an Urban Area.
Hospital Emergency Department Visits for Carbon Monoxide Poisoning Following an October 2006 Snowstorm in Western New York.
NEHA SECOND VICE PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE PROFILES.
Meeting the Environmental Health Training Challenges of the Local Public Health Workforce in Massachusetts.
grounded theory. The role and place of knowledge and literature in grounded theory.
grounded theory. Choosing between Glaser and Strauss: an example.
grounded theory. Practical strategies to avoid the pitfalls in grounded theory research.
issues in research. Participant overexposure and the role of researcher judgement.
Nurse-focused ethical solutions to problems in organ transplantation.
Moral distress experienced by psychiatric nurses in Japan.
Evaluation of nursing students’ training in medical law.
Images of a ‘good nurse’ presented by teaching staff.
Nurses’ ethical reflections on caring for people with malodorous exuding ulcers.
Cultural safety and the socioethical nurse.
Work-based learning and the role of managers.
Establishing a sustainable nursing workforce.
CREATIVE CARE: THE ROLE OF THE ARTS IN HOSPITAL.
HOW SENIOR NURSES CAN MAKE CHANGE HAPPEN.
Improving quality of care for people with dementia in general hospitals.
The assessment and management of pain in people with dementia in care homes.
The occupational health brand: What are we?
CPD: Continuing Professional Development. A message for men.
CPD Continuing Professional Development. Identify the warnings.
A bitter pill to swallow.
Assessing lifting competence.
Tipping the scales.
An evaluation of observed structural clinical examinations.
Managing the emotional aspects of end of life care for children and young people.
The use of morphine to control pain in advanced cancer: an investigation of clinical usage in Bangladesh.
Learning from dying patients during their final days: life reflections gleaned from dignity therapy.
An exploration into the palliative and end-of-life experiences of carers of people with Parkinson’s disease.
Leading from the front.
Differential diagnosis of chest pain.
The consultation: how to do it -- part 3.
Social enterprise in primary and community care.
Testicular cancer.
Better Breathing Bangladesh.
Health promotion in a job centre.
A QOF perspective on… mental health.
The consultation: how to do it -- part 1.
Cardiovascular disease.
The consultation: how to do it - part 2.
Breast care.
Preventing injury in children and adolescents.
Waiting for a Goal.
Prozac for the Planet:
Every Last One:
Blowdown:
Rock of Ages:
Things Periodic and Elemental.
So This Is Paktya.
Too Bad Not to Fail.
The Side Project.
Voices of a Nation.
Hive of Nerves.
The Bearable Lightness of Being.
The Old Murderer.
Reducing Science and Religion.
Maker of Magazines.
Mayhem Across the Border.
A Pilgrim's Progress.
Solitude and Leadership: If you want others to follow, learn to be alone with your thoughts.
Reading in a Digital Age: Notes on why the novel and the Inernet are opposites, and why the latter both undermines the former and makes it more necessary.
They Get to Me: A young psycholinguist confesses her strong attraction to pronouns.
When the Lights Goes On: How a great teacher can bring a receptive mind to life.
To Die of Having Lived: A neurological surgeon reflects on what patients and their families should and should not do when the end draws near.
Auteurs Gone Wild: Why the director's cut often turns into an ax murder.
Honey.
Growing Up in a Troubled Neighborhood.
An Assassin's Tale.
'Our Big Mistake.'
My Brain on My Mind: A thrumming, plastic mystery allows us to think, feel, and remember.
At War with the State in Order to Save the Lives of Our Children: The Battle to Save Ethnic Studies in Arizona.
A Future We Wish to See: Racialized Communities Studies after White Racial Anxiety and Resentment.
THE WAR ON HISTORY: DEFENDING ETHNIC STUDIES.
Race and US Foreign Policy: Reflections on West Africa.
Exposure to Video Display Terminals and Risk of Small-for-Gestational-Age Birth.
Nitrate and Nitrite Levels of Potable Water Supply in Warri, Nigeria: A Public Health Concern.
Urban Heat Island and Air Pollution--An Emerging Role for Hospital Respiratory Admissions in an Urban Area.
Hospital Emergency Department Visits for Carbon Monoxide Poisoning Following an October 2006 Snowstorm in Western New York.
NEHA SECOND VICE PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE PROFILES.
Meeting the Environmental Health Training Challenges of the Local Public Health Workforce in Massachusetts.
grounded theory. The role and place of knowledge and literature in grounded theory.
grounded theory. Choosing between Glaser and Strauss: an example.
grounded theory. Practical strategies to avoid the pitfalls in grounded theory research.
issues in research. Participant overexposure and the role of researcher judgement.
Nurse-focused ethical solutions to problems in organ transplantation.
Moral distress experienced by psychiatric nurses in Japan.
Evaluation of nursing students’ training in medical law.
Images of a ‘good nurse’ presented by teaching staff.
Nurses’ ethical reflections on caring for people with malodorous exuding ulcers.
Cultural safety and the socioethical nurse.
Work-based learning and the role of managers.
Establishing a sustainable nursing workforce.
CREATIVE CARE: THE ROLE OF THE ARTS IN HOSPITAL.
HOW SENIOR NURSES CAN MAKE CHANGE HAPPEN.
Improving quality of care for people with dementia in general hospitals.
The assessment and management of pain in people with dementia in care homes.
The occupational health brand: What are we?
CPD: Continuing Professional Development. A message for men.
CPD Continuing Professional Development. Identify the warnings.
A bitter pill to swallow.
Assessing lifting competence.
Tipping the scales.
An evaluation of observed structural clinical examinations.
Managing the emotional aspects of end of life care for children and young people.
The use of morphine to control pain in advanced cancer: an investigation of clinical usage in Bangladesh.
Learning from dying patients during their final days: life reflections gleaned from dignity therapy.
An exploration into the palliative and end-of-life experiences of carers of people with Parkinson’s disease.
Leading from the front.
Differential diagnosis of chest pain.
The consultation: how to do it -- part 3.
Social enterprise in primary and community care.
Testicular cancer.
Better Breathing Bangladesh.
Health promotion in a job centre.
A QOF perspective on… mental health.
The consultation: how to do it -- part 1.
Cardiovascular disease.
The consultation: how to do it - part 2.
Breast care.
Preventing injury in children and adolescents.
Waiting for a Goal.
Prozac for the Planet:
Every Last One:
Blowdown:
Rock of Ages:
Things Periodic and Elemental.
So This Is Paktya.
Too Bad Not to Fail.
The Side Project.
Voices of a Nation.
Hive of Nerves.
The Bearable Lightness of Being.
The Old Murderer.
Reducing Science and Religion.
Maker of Magazines.
Mayhem Across the Border.
A Pilgrim's Progress.
Solitude and Leadership: If you want others to follow, learn to be alone with your thoughts.
Reading in a Digital Age: Notes on why the novel and the Inernet are opposites, and why the latter both undermines the former and makes it more necessary.
They Get to Me: A young psycholinguist confesses her strong attraction to pronouns.
When the Lights Goes On: How a great teacher can bring a receptive mind to life.
To Die of Having Lived: A neurological surgeon reflects on what patients and their families should and should not do when the end draws near.
Auteurs Gone Wild: Why the director's cut often turns into an ax murder.
Honey.
Growing Up in a Troubled Neighborhood.
An Assassin's Tale.
'Our Big Mistake.'
My Brain on My Mind: A thrumming, plastic mystery allows us to think, feel, and remember.
At War with the State in Order to Save the Lives of Our Children: The Battle to Save Ethnic Studies in Arizona.
A Future We Wish to See: Racialized Communities Studies after White Racial Anxiety and Resentment.
THE WAR ON HISTORY: DEFENDING ETHNIC STUDIES.
Race and US Foreign Policy: Reflections on West Africa.